{\rtf1\ansi
{\fonttbl
\f0\fswiss Arial;
\f1\fdecor Symbol;
\f2\fmodern Courier New;
}\deff0\fs20
#{\footnote rasmol}
${\footnote RasMol V2.7.5}
+{\footnote doc}
{\fs8 \par }{\fs28\b RasMol V2.7.5}{\fs8 \line }
{\fs24\b Molecular Graphics Visualisation Tool}\line\pard
\par\par
{\fs24\b Table of Contents}\line\pard
\par\par
\tx250\li250\fi-250
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Notices}{\v chnotice}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Copying}{\v chcopying}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Introduction}{\v chintro}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Command Reference}{\v chcomref}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Internal Parameters}{\v chsetopt}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Atom Expressions}{\v chexprs}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Predefined Sets}{\v predefinedsets}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Colour Schemes}{\v chcolours}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb File Formats}{\v chfile}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Machine-Specific Support}{\v chmacspec}\line
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Bibliography}{\v chbib}\line
\pard
\par\par
{\fs16 Based on RasMol 2.6 by Roger Sayle}\line
{\fs16 Biomolecular Structures Group, Glaxo Wellcome Research & Development}\line
{\fs16 Stevenage, Hertfordshire, UK}\line
{\fs16 Version 2.6, August 1995, Version 2.6.4, December 1998}\line
{\fs16 Copyright \'a9 Roger Sayle 1992-1999}{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 and Based on Mods by}{\fs8 \par\par }
{\tx3400\tx5000\tx6000\tx8000
{\b\fs16 Author\tab Version \tab Date\tab Copyright }
{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 Arne Mueller\tab RasMol 2.6x1\tab May 98\tab \'a9 Arne Mueller 1998\ }
{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 Gary Grossman and\tab RasMol 2.5-ucb\tab Nov 95\tab \'a9 UC Regents/ModularCHEM }\line
{\fs16  Marco Molinaro\tab RasMol 2.5-ucb\tab Nov 96\tab Consortium 1995, 1996 }
{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16  Philippe Valadon\tab RasTop 1.3\tab Aug 00\tab
\'a9 Philippe Valadon 2000 }
{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16  Herbert J. Bernstein\tab RasMol 2.7.0\tab Mar 99\tab \'a9 Herbert J. Bernstein }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.1     \tab Jun 99\tab 1998-2008\cell }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.1.1   \tab Jan 01 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.2     \tab Aug 00 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.2.1   \tab Apr 01 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.2.1.1 \tab Jan 04 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.3     \tab Feb 05 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.3.1   \tab Apr 06 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.4     \tab Nov 07 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.4.1   \tab Jan 08 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.4.2   \tab Mar 08 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.5     \tab Jun 09 }\line
{\fs16 \tab RasMol 2.7.5.1   \tab Jul 09 }
{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 RasMol 2.7.5 incorporates changes by T. Ikonen, G. McQuillan, N. Darakev}\line
{\fs16 and L. Andrews (via the neartree package).  Work on RasMol 2.7.5}\line
{\fs16 supported in part by grant 1R15GM078077-01 from the National Institute}\line
{\fs16 of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS), U.S. National Institutes of Health}\line
{\fs16 and by grant ER63601-1021466-0009501 from the Office of Biological &}\line
{\fs16 Environmental Research (BER), Office of Science, U. S. Department of}\line
{\fs16 Energy.  RasMol 2.7.4 incorporated  changes by G. Todorov, Nan Jia,}\line
{\fs16 N. Darakev, P. Kamburov, G. McQuillan, and J. Jemilawon. Work on RasMol}\line
{\fs16 2.7.4 supported in part by grant 1R15GM078077-01 from the NIGMS/NIH and}\line
{\fs16 grant ER63601-1021466-0009501 from BER/DOE.  RasMol 2.7.3 incorporates}\line
{\fs16 changes by Clarice Chigbo, Ricky Chachra, and Mamoru Yamanishi.  Work}\line
{\fs16 on RasMol 2.7.3 supported in part by grants DBI-0203064, DBI-0315281}\line
{\fs16 and EF-0312612 from the U.S. National Science Foundation and grant}\line
{\fs16 DE-FG02-03ER63601 from BER/DOE. The content is solely the responsibility}\line
{\fs16 of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of}\line
{\fs16 the funding organizations.}\line
{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 The code for use of RasMol under GTK in RasMol 2.7.4.2 was written by}\line
{\fs16 Teemu Ikonen.}\line
{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 and Incorporating Translations by}{\fs8 \par\par }}
{\tx3400\tx6000\tx8000
{\b\fs16 Author \tab  Item \tab Language }{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 Isabel Serv\'e1n Mart\'ednez, \tab 2.6 Manual\tab Spanish }\line
{\fs16 Jos\'e9 Miguel Fern\'e1ndez Fern\'e1ndez\tab }\line
{\fs16 Jos\'e9 Miguel Fern\'e1ndez Fern\'e1ndez \tab 2.7.1 Manual\tab Spanish }\line
{\fs16 Fernando Gabriel Ranea \tab 2.7.1 menus and messages\tab Spanish }{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 Jean-Pierre Demailly \tab 2.7.1 menus and messages \tab French }{\fs8 \par\par }
{\fs16 Giuseppe Martini, Giovanni Paolella \tab 2.7.1 menus and messages \tab}\line
{\fs16 A. Davassi, M. Masullo, C. Liotto\tab 2.7.1 help file \tab Italian}\line
{\fs16 G. Pozhvanov \tab 2.7.3 menus and messages \tab Russian}\line
{\fs16 G. Todorov \tab 2.7.3 menus and messages \tab Bulgarian}\line
{\fs16 Nan Jia, G. Todorov \tab 2.7.3 menus and messages \tab Chinese}\line
{\fs16 Mamoru Yamanishi, Katajima Hajime \tab 2.7.3 menus and messages \tab Japanese}
\par\pard}
\par\par
{\fs16
The original RasMol manual was created by Roger Sayle.  In July 1996, {}
Dr. Margaret Wong of the Chemistry Department, Swinburne University {}
of Technology, Australia, made extensive revisions to the RasMol 2.5 {}
manual to accurately reflect the operation of RasMol 2.6.  Eric Martz {}
of the University of Massachusetts made further revisions.  In May {}
1997, William McClure of Carnegie Mellon University reorganized the {}
HTML version of the manual into multiple sections which could be {}
downloaded quickly and added use of frames.   Portions of the 2.7.1 {}
version of the RasMol manual were derived with  permission from {}
William McClure's version using Roger Sayle's rasmol.doc for {}
version 2.6.4 as the primary source.  Changes have been made in {}
August 2000 for RasMol version 2.7.2, January 2001 for RasMol {}
version 2.7.1.1, April 2001 for RasMol version 2.7.2.1, {}
February 2005 for RasMol version 2.7.3 and November 2007, {}
January 2008 and March 2008 for RasMol version 2.7.4. {}
}
\par\par
{\fs16 Documentation Last Updated 17 July 2009}\line
{\fs16 Edited by Herbert J. Bernstein and Frances C. Bernstein}
\par\par
{\fs16 Please read the file NOTICE for important notices which apply to this}\line
{\fs16 package and for license terms (GPL or RASLIC).}
\pard\par
\par\par
RasMol Copyright \'a9 Roger Sayle 1992-1999\par {}
Version 2.6x1 Mods Copyright \'a9 Arne Mueller 1998\par {}
Versions 2.5-ucb and 2.6-ucb Mods Copyright \'a9\par {}
UC Regents/ModularCHEM Consortium 1995, 1996\par {}
RasTop 1.3 Copyright \'a9 Philippe Valadon 2000\par {}
Version 2.7.0, 2.7.1, 2.7.1.1, 2.7.2, 2.7.2.1, 2.7.2.1.1\par {}
2.7.3, 2.7.3.1, 2.7.4, 2.7.4.1, 2.7.4.2, 2.7.5, 2.7.5.1  Mods\par {}
Copyright \'a9 Herbert J. Bernstein 1998-2009\par {}
rasmol@bernstein-plus-sons.com\par {}
\par\par
{\fs16
All rights reserved. Use of copyright notice does not imply publication or {}
disclosure. The information supplied in this document is believed to be true {}
but no liability is assumed for its use or for the infringements of the rights {}
of the others resulting from its use. Information in this document is subject {}
to change without notice and does not represent a commitment on the part of {}
the supplier. {}
}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chnotice}
${\footnote Notices}
{\fs24\b Notices}\par\par
\par\par
This software has been created from several sources.  Much of the code is {}
from RasMol 2.6, as created by Roger Sayle. {}
See: {}
{\tx750\f2\tab http://www.dcs.ed.ac.uk/home/rasmol\par}\pard\par
The torsion angle code, new POVRAY3 code and other features are derived from {}
the RasMol2.6x1 revisions by Arne Mueller. {}
{\tx750\f2\tab ftp://nexus.roko.goe.net/pub/rasmol\par}\pard\par
The Ramachandran printer plot code was derived from fisipl created by Frances C. {}
Bernstein.  See the Protein Data Bank program tape. {}
\par\par
The code to display multiple molecules and to allow bond rotation is derived {}
in large part from the UCB mods by Gary Grossman and Marco Molinaro, {}
included with {}
permission of Eileen Lewis of the ModularCHEM Consortium. {}
{\tx750\f2\tab http://mc2.CCHem.Berkeley.EDU/RasMol\par}\pard\par
\par\par
The CIF modifications make use of a library based in part on CBFlib by {}
Paul J. Ellis and Herbert J. Bernstein. {}
See: {}
{\tx750\f2\tab http://www.bernstein-plus-sons.com/software/CBF\par}\pard\par
Parts of CBFlib is loosely based on the CIFPARSE software package from the NDB {}
at Rutgers university. {}
See: {}
{\tx750\f2\tab http://www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/mmcif/ndb/software/CIFPARSE/\par}\pard\par
Please type the RasMol commands {}
'{\f2\b help copying}', {}
'{\f2\b help general}', {}
'{\f2\b help IUCR}', {}
'{\f2\b help CBFlib}', {}
 and {}
'{\f2\b help CIFPARSE}' {}
for applicable notices.  Please type {}
'{\f2\b help copyright}' {}
for copyright notices.  If you use RasMol V2.6 {}
or an earlier version, type the RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b help oldnotice}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chcopying}
${\footnote Copying}
{\fs24\b Copying}\par\par
\par\par
This version is based directly on RasMol version 2.7.4.2, {}
on RasMol verion 2.7.4.2, on RasMol version 2.7.4, {}
on RasMol version 2.7.3.1, on RasMol version 2.7.3, {}
on RasMol version 2.7.2.1.1, Rasmol version 2.7.2, RasMol {}
version 2.7.1.1 and RasTop version 1.3 and indirectly on {}
the RasMol 2.5-ucb and 2.6-ucb versions and version {}
2.6_CIF.2, RasMol 2.6x1 and RasMol_2.6.4. {}
\par\par
RasMol 2.7.5 may be distributed under the terms of the GNU {}
General Public License (the GPL), see {}
\par\par
          http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.txt {}
\par\par
or the file GPL or type the command {}
'{\uldb help GPL}{\v GPL}' {}
\par\par
or RasMol 2.7.5 may be distributed under the RASMOL license. {}
See the file NOTICE {}
or type the command {}
'{\uldb help RASLIC}{\v RASLIC}' {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote gpl}
${\footnote GPL}
K{\footnote gpl}
{\b GPL}\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~GNU\~GENERAL\~PUBLIC\~LICENSE\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~Version\~2,\~June\~1991\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~Copyright\~(C)\~1989,\~1991\~Free\~Software\~Foundation,\~Inc.\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~59\~Temple\~Place,\~Suite\~330,\~Boston,\~MA\~\~02111-1307\~\~USA\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~Everyone\~is\~permitted\~to\~copy\~and\~distribute\~verbatim\~copies\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~of\~this\~license\~document,\~but\~changing\~it\~is\~not\~allowed.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~Preamble\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~The\~licenses\~for\~most\~software\~are\~designed\~to\~take\~away\~your\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20freedom\~to\~share\~and\~change\~it.\~\~By\~contrast,\~the\~GNU\~General\~Public\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20License\~is\~intended\~to\~guarantee\~your\~freedom\~to\~share\~and\~change\~free\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20software--to\~make\~sure\~the\~software\~is\~free\~for\~all\~its\~users.\~\~This\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20General\~Public\~License\~applies\~to\~most\~of\~the\~Free\~Software\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Foundation's\~software\~and\~to\~any\~other\~program\~whose\~authors\~commit\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20using\~it.\~\~(Some\~other\~Free\~Software\~Foundation\~software\~is\~covered\~by\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20the\~GNU\~Library\~General\~Public\~License\~instead.)\~\~You\~can\~apply\~it\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20your\~programs,\~too.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~When\~we\~speak\~of\~free\~software,\~we\~are\~referring\~to\~freedom,\~not\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20price.\~\~Our\~General\~Public\~Licenses\~are\~designed\~to\~make\~sure\~that\~you\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20have\~the\~freedom\~to\~distribute\~copies\~of\~free\~software\~(and\~charge\~for\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20this\~service\~if\~you\~wish),\~that\~you\~receive\~source\~code\~or\~can\~get\~it\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20if\~you\~want\~it,\~that\~you\~can\~change\~the\~software\~or\~use\~pieces\~of\~it\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20in\~new\~free\~programs;\~and\~that\~you\~know\~you\~can\~do\~these\~things.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~To\~protect\~your\~rights,\~we\~need\~to\~make\~restrictions\~that\~forbid\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20anyone\~to\~deny\~you\~these\~rights\~or\~to\~ask\~you\~to\~surrender\~the\~rights.\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20These\~restrictions\~translate\~to\~certain\~responsibilities\~for\~you\~if\~you\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20distribute\~copies\~of\~the\~software,\~or\~if\~you\~modify\~it.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~For\~example,\~if\~you\~distribute\~copies\~of\~such\~a\~program,\~whether\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20gratis\~or\~for\~a\~fee,\~you\~must\~give\~the\~recipients\~all\~the\~rights\~that\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20you\~have.\~\~You\~must\~make\~sure\~that\~they,\~too,\~receive\~or\~can\~get\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20source\~code.\~\~And\~you\~must\~show\~them\~these\~terms\~so\~they\~know\~their\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20rights.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~We\~protect\~your\~rights\~with\~two\~steps:\~(1)\~copyright\~the\~software,\~and\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20(2)\~offer\~you\~this\~license\~which\~gives\~you\~legal\~permission\~to\~copy,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20distribute\~and/or\~modify\~the\~software.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~Also,\~for\~each\~author's\~protection\~and\~ours,\~we\~want\~to\~make\~certain\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20that\~everyone\~understands\~that\~there\~is\~no\~warranty\~for\~this\~free\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20software.\~\~If\~the\~software\~is\~modified\~by\~someone\~else\~and\~passed\~on,\~we\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20want\~its\~recipients\~to\~know\~that\~what\~they\~have\~is\~not\~the\~original,\~so\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20that\~any\~problems\~introduced\~by\~others\~will\~not\~reflect\~on\~the\~original\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20authors'\~reputations.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~Finally,\~any\~free\~program\~is\~threatened\~constantly\~by\~software\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20patents.\~\~We\~wish\~to\~avoid\~the\~danger\~that\~redistributors\~of\~a\~free\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20program\~will\~individually\~obtain\~patent\~licenses,\~in\~effect\~making\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20program\~proprietary.\~\~To\~prevent\~this,\~we\~have\~made\~it\~clear\~that\~any\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20patent\~must\~be\~licensed\~for\~everyone's\~free\~use\~or\~not\~licensed\~at\~all.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~The\~precise\~terms\~and\~conditions\~for\~copying,\~distribution\~and\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20modification\~follow.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~GNU\~GENERAL\~PUBLIC\~LICENSE\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~TERMS\~AND\~CONDITIONS\~FOR\~COPYING,\~DISTRIBUTION\~AND\~MODIFICATION\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~0.\~This\~License\~applies\~to\~any\~program\~or\~other\~work\~which\~contains\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20a\~notice\~placed\~by\~the\~copyright\~holder\~saying\~it\~may\~be\~distributed\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20under\~the\~terms\~of\~this\~General\~Public\~License.\~\~The\~"Program",\~below,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20refers\~to\~any\~such\~program\~or\~work,\~and\~a\~"work\~based\~on\~the\~Program"\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20means\~either\~the\~Program\~or\~any\~derivative\~work\~under\~copyright\~law:\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20that\~is\~to\~say,\~a\~work\~containing\~the\~Program\~or\~a\~portion\~of\~it,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20either\~verbatim\~or\~with\~modifications\~and/or\~translated\~into\~another\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20language.\~\~(Hereinafter,\~translation\~is\~included\~without\~limitation\~in\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20the\~term\~"modification".)\~\~Each\~licensee\~is\~addressed\~as\~"you".\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20Activities\~other\~than\~copying,\~distribution\~and\~modification\~are\~not\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20covered\~by\~this\~License;\~they\~are\~outside\~its\~scope.\~\~The\~act\~of\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20running\~the\~Program\~is\~not\~restricted,\~and\~the\~output\~from\~the\~Program\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20is\~covered\~only\~if\~its\~contents\~constitute\~a\~work\~based\~on\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Program\~(independent\~of\~having\~been\~made\~by\~running\~the\~Program).\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Whether\~that\~is\~true\~depends\~on\~what\~the\~Program\~does.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~1.\~You\~may\~copy\~and\~distribute\~verbatim\~copies\~of\~the\~Program's\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20source\~code\~as\~you\~receive\~it,\~in\~any\~medium,\~provided\~that\~you\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20conspicuously\~and\~appropriately\~publish\~on\~each\~copy\~an\~appropriate\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20copyright\~notice\~and\~disclaimer\~of\~warranty;\~keep\~intact\~all\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20notices\~that\~refer\~to\~this\~License\~and\~to\~the\~absence\~of\~any\~warranty;\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20and\~give\~any\~other\~recipients\~of\~the\~Program\~a\~copy\~of\~this\~License\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20along\~with\~the\~Program.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20You\~may\~charge\~a\~fee\~for\~the\~physical\~act\~of\~transferring\~a\~copy,\~and\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20you\~may\~at\~your\~option\~offer\~warranty\~protection\~in\~exchange\~for\~a\~fee.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~2.\~You\~may\~modify\~your\~copy\~or\~copies\~of\~the\~Program\~or\~any\~portion\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20of\~it,\~thus\~forming\~a\~work\~based\~on\~the\~Program,\~and\~copy\~and\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20distribute\~such\~modifications\~or\~work\~under\~the\~terms\~of\~Section\~1\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20above,\~provided\~that\~you\~also\~meet\~all\~of\~these\~conditions:\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~a)\~You\~must\~cause\~the\~modified\~files\~to\~carry\~prominent\~notices\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~stating\~that\~you\~changed\~the\~files\~and\~the\~date\~of\~any\~change.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~b)\~You\~must\~cause\~any\~work\~that\~you\~distribute\~or\~publish,\~that\~in\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~whole\~or\~in\~part\~contains\~or\~is\~derived\~from\~the\~Program\~or\~any\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~part\~thereof,\~to\~be\~licensed\~as\~a\~whole\~at\~no\~charge\~to\~all\~third\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~parties\~under\~the\~terms\~of\~this\~License.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~c)\~If\~the\~modified\~program\~normally\~reads\~commands\~interactively\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~when\~run,\~you\~must\~cause\~it,\~when\~started\~running\~for\~such\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~interactive\~use\~in\~the\~most\~ordinary\~way,\~to\~print\~or\~display\~an\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~announcement\~including\~an\~appropriate\~copyright\~notice\~and\~a\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~notice\~that\~there\~is\~no\~warranty\~(or\~else,\~saying\~that\~you\~provide\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~a\~warranty)\~and\~that\~users\~may\~redistribute\~the\~program\~under\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~these\~conditions,\~and\~telling\~the\~user\~how\~to\~view\~a\~copy\~of\~this\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~License.\~\~(Exception:\~if\~the\~Program\~itself\~is\~interactive\~but\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~does\~not\~normally\~print\~such\~an\~announcement,\~your\~work\~based\~on\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~the\~Program\~is\~not\~required\~to\~print\~an\~announcement.)\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20These\~requirements\~apply\~to\~the\~modified\~work\~as\~a\~whole.\~\~If\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20identifiable\~sections\~of\~that\~work\~are\~not\~derived\~from\~the\~Program,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20and\~can\~be\~reasonably\~considered\~independent\~and\~separate\~works\~in\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20themselves,\~then\~this\~License,\~and\~its\~terms,\~do\~not\~apply\~to\~those\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20sections\~when\~you\~distribute\~them\~as\~separate\~works.\~\~But\~when\~you\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20distribute\~the\~same\~sections\~as\~part\~of\~a\~whole\~which\~is\~a\~work\~based\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20on\~the\~Program,\~the\~distribution\~of\~the\~whole\~must\~be\~on\~the\~terms\~of\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20this\~License,\~whose\~permissions\~for\~other\~licensees\~extend\~to\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20entire\~whole,\~and\~thus\~to\~each\~and\~every\~part\~regardless\~of\~who\~wrote\~it.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20Thus,\~it\~is\~not\~the\~intent\~of\~this\~section\~to\~claim\~rights\~or\~contest\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20your\~rights\~to\~work\~written\~entirely\~by\~you;\~rather,\~the\~intent\~is\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20exercise\~the\~right\~to\~control\~the\~distribution\~of\~derivative\~or\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20collective\~works\~based\~on\~the\~Program.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20In\~addition,\~mere\~aggregation\~of\~another\~work\~not\~based\~on\~the\~Program\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20with\~the\~Program\~(or\~with\~a\~work\~based\~on\~the\~Program)\~on\~a\~volume\~of\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20a\~storage\~or\~distribution\~medium\~does\~not\~bring\~the\~other\~work\~under\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20the\~scope\~of\~this\~License.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~3.\~You\~may\~copy\~and\~distribute\~the\~Program\~(or\~a\~work\~based\~on\~it,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20under\~Section\~2)\~in\~object\~code\~or\~executable\~form\~under\~the\~terms\~of\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Sections\~1\~and\~2\~above\~provided\~that\~you\~also\~do\~one\~of\~the\~following:\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~a)\~Accompany\~it\~with\~the\~complete\~corresponding\~machine-readable\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~source\~code,\~which\~must\~be\~distributed\~under\~the\~terms\~of\~Sections\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~1\~and\~2\~above\~on\~a\~medium\~customarily\~used\~for\~software\~interchange;\~or,\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~b)\~Accompany\~it\~with\~a\~written\~offer,\~valid\~for\~at\~least\~three\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~years,\~to\~give\~any\~third\~party,\~for\~a\~charge\~no\~more\~than\~your\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~cost\~of\~physically\~performing\~source\~distribution,\~a\~complete\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~machine-readable\~copy\~of\~the\~corresponding\~source\~code,\~to\~be\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~distributed\~under\~the\~terms\~of\~Sections\~1\~and\~2\~above\~on\~a\~medium\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~customarily\~used\~for\~software\~interchange;\~or,\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~c)\~Accompany\~it\~with\~the\~information\~you\~received\~as\~to\~the\~offer\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~to\~distribute\~corresponding\~source\~code.\~\~(This\~alternative\~is\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~allowed\~only\~for\~noncommercial\~distribution\~and\~only\~if\~you\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~received\~the\~program\~in\~object\~code\~or\~executable\~form\~with\~such\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~an\~offer,\~in\~accord\~with\~Subsection\~b\~above.)\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20The\~source\~code\~for\~a\~work\~means\~the\~preferred\~form\~of\~the\~work\~for\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20making\~modifications\~to\~it.\~\~For\~an\~executable\~work,\~complete\~source\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20code\~means\~all\~the\~source\~code\~for\~all\~modules\~it\~contains,\~plus\~any\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20associated\~interface\~definition\~files,\~plus\~the\~scripts\~used\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20control\~compilation\~and\~installation\~of\~the\~executable.\~\~However,\~as\~a\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20special\~exception,\~the\~source\~code\~distributed\~need\~not\~include\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20anything\~that\~is\~normally\~distributed\~(in\~either\~source\~or\~binary\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20form)\~with\~the\~major\~components\~(compiler,\~kernel,\~and\~so\~on)\~of\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20operating\~system\~on\~which\~the\~executable\~runs,\~unless\~that\~component\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20itself\~accompanies\~the\~executable.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20If\~distribution\~of\~executable\~or\~object\~code\~is\~made\~by\~offering\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20access\~to\~copy\~from\~a\~designated\~place,\~then\~offering\~equivalent\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20access\~to\~copy\~the\~source\~code\~from\~the\~same\~place\~counts\~as\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20distribution\~of\~the\~source\~code,\~even\~though\~third\~parties\~are\~not\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20compelled\~to\~copy\~the\~source\~along\~with\~the\~object\~code.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~4.\~You\~may\~not\~copy,\~modify,\~sublicense,\~or\~distribute\~the\~Program\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20except\~as\~expressly\~provided\~under\~this\~License.\~\~Any\~attempt\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20otherwise\~to\~copy,\~modify,\~sublicense\~or\~distribute\~the\~Program\~is\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20void,\~and\~will\~automatically\~terminate\~your\~rights\~under\~this\~License.\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20However,\~parties\~who\~have\~received\~copies,\~or\~rights,\~from\~you\~under\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20this\~License\~will\~not\~have\~their\~licenses\~terminated\~so\~long\~as\~such\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20parties\~remain\~in\~full\~compliance.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~5.\~You\~are\~not\~required\~to\~accept\~this\~License,\~since\~you\~have\~not\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20signed\~it.\~\~However,\~nothing\~else\~grants\~you\~permission\~to\~modify\~or\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20distribute\~the\~Program\~or\~its\~derivative\~works.\~\~These\~actions\~are\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20prohibited\~by\~law\~if\~you\~do\~not\~accept\~this\~License.\~\~Therefore,\~by\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20modifying\~or\~distributing\~the\~Program\~(or\~any\~work\~based\~on\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Program),\~you\~indicate\~your\~acceptance\~of\~this\~License\~to\~do\~so,\~and\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20all\~its\~terms\~and\~conditions\~for\~copying,\~distributing\~or\~modifying\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20the\~Program\~or\~works\~based\~on\~it.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~6.\~Each\~time\~you\~redistribute\~the\~Program\~(or\~any\~work\~based\~on\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Program),\~the\~recipient\~automatically\~receives\~a\~license\~from\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20original\~licensor\~to\~copy,\~distribute\~or\~modify\~the\~Program\~subject\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20these\~terms\~and\~conditions.\~\~You\~may\~not\~impose\~any\~further\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20restrictions\~on\~the\~recipients'\~exercise\~of\~the\~rights\~granted\~herein.\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20You\~are\~not\~responsible\~for\~enforcing\~compliance\~by\~third\~parties\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20this\~License.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~7.\~If,\~as\~a\~consequence\~of\~a\~court\~judgment\~or\~allegation\~of\~patent\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20infringement\~or\~for\~any\~other\~reason\~(not\~limited\~to\~patent\~issues),\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20conditions\~are\~imposed\~on\~you\~(whether\~by\~court\~order,\~agreement\~or\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20otherwise)\~that\~contradict\~the\~conditions\~of\~this\~License,\~they\~do\~not\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20excuse\~you\~from\~the\~conditions\~of\~this\~License.\~\~If\~you\~cannot\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20distribute\~so\~as\~to\~satisfy\~simultaneously\~your\~obligations\~under\~this\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20License\~and\~any\~other\~pertinent\~obligations,\~then\~as\~a\~consequence\~you\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20may\~not\~distribute\~the\~Program\~at\~all.\~\~For\~example,\~if\~a\~patent\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20license\~would\~not\~permit\~royalty-free\~redistribution\~of\~the\~Program\~by\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20all\~those\~who\~receive\~copies\~directly\~or\~indirectly\~through\~you,\~then\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20the\~only\~way\~you\~could\~satisfy\~both\~it\~and\~this\~License\~would\~be\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20refrain\~entirely\~from\~distribution\~of\~the\~Program.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20If\~any\~portion\~of\~this\~section\~is\~held\~invalid\~or\~unenforceable\~under\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20any\~particular\~circumstance,\~the\~balance\~of\~the\~section\~is\~intended\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20apply\~and\~the\~section\~as\~a\~whole\~is\~intended\~to\~apply\~in\~other\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20circumstances.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20It\~is\~not\~the\~purpose\~of\~this\~section\~to\~induce\~you\~to\~infringe\~any\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20patents\~or\~other\~property\~right\~claims\~or\~to\~contest\~validity\~of\~any\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20such\~claims;\~this\~section\~has\~the\~sole\~purpose\~of\~protecting\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20integrity\~of\~the\~free\~software\~distribution\~system,\~which\~is\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20implemented\~by\~public\~license\~practices.\~\~Many\~people\~have\~made\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20generous\~contributions\~to\~the\~wide\~range\~of\~software\~distributed\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20through\~that\~system\~in\~reliance\~on\~consistent\~application\~of\~that\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20system;\~it\~is\~up\~to\~the\~author/donor\~to\~decide\~if\~he\~or\~she\~is\~willing\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20to\~distribute\~software\~through\~any\~other\~system\~and\~a\~licensee\~cannot\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20impose\~that\~choice.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20This\~section\~is\~intended\~to\~make\~thoroughly\~clear\~what\~is\~believed\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20be\~a\~consequence\~of\~the\~rest\~of\~this\~License.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~8.\~If\~the\~distribution\~and/or\~use\~of\~the\~Program\~is\~restricted\~in\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20certain\~countries\~either\~by\~patents\~or\~by\~copyrighted\~interfaces,\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20original\~copyright\~holder\~who\~places\~the\~Program\~under\~this\~License\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20may\~add\~an\~explicit\~geographical\~distribution\~limitation\~excluding\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20those\~countries,\~so\~that\~distribution\~is\~permitted\~only\~in\~or\~among\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20countries\~not\~thus\~excluded.\~\~In\~such\~case,\~this\~License\~incorporates\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20the\~limitation\~as\~if\~written\~in\~the\~body\~of\~this\~License.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~9.\~The\~Free\~Software\~Foundation\~may\~publish\~revised\~and/or\~new\~versions\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20of\~the\~General\~Public\~License\~from\~time\~to\~time.\~\~Such\~new\~versions\~will\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20be\~similar\~in\~spirit\~to\~the\~present\~version,\~but\~may\~differ\~in\~detail\~to\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20address\~new\~problems\~or\~concerns.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20Each\~version\~is\~given\~a\~distinguishing\~version\~number.\~\~If\~the\~Program\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20specifies\~a\~version\~number\~of\~this\~License\~which\~applies\~to\~it\~and\~"any\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20later\~version",\~you\~have\~the\~option\~of\~following\~the\~terms\~and\~conditions\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20either\~of\~that\~version\~or\~of\~any\~later\~version\~published\~by\~the\~Free\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Software\~Foundation.\~\~If\~the\~Program\~does\~not\~specify\~a\~version\~number\~of\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20this\~License,\~you\~may\~choose\~any\~version\~ever\~published\~by\~the\~Free\~Software\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Foundation.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~10.\~If\~you\~wish\~to\~incorporate\~parts\~of\~the\~Program\~into\~other\~free\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20programs\~whose\~distribution\~conditions\~are\~different,\~write\~to\~the\~author\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20to\~ask\~for\~permission.\~\~For\~software\~which\~is\~copyrighted\~by\~the\~Free\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Software\~Foundation,\~write\~to\~the\~Free\~Software\~Foundation;\~we\~sometimes\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20make\~exceptions\~for\~this.\~\~Our\~decision\~will\~be\~guided\~by\~the\~two\~goals\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20of\~preserving\~the\~free\~status\~of\~all\~derivatives\~of\~our\~free\~software\~and\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20of\~promoting\~the\~sharing\~and\~reuse\~of\~software\~generally.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~NO\~WARRANTY\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~11.\~BECAUSE\~THE\~PROGRAM\~IS\~LICENSED\~FREE\~OF\~CHARGE,\~THERE\~IS\~NO\~WARRANTY\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20FOR\~THE\~PROGRAM,\~TO\~THE\~EXTENT\~PERMITTED\~BY\~APPLICABLE\~LAW.\~\~EXCEPT\~WHEN\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20OTHERWISE\~STATED\~IN\~WRITING\~THE\~COPYRIGHT\~HOLDERS\~AND/OR\~OTHER\~PARTIES\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20PROVIDE\~THE\~PROGRAM\~"AS\~IS"\~WITHOUT\~WARRANTY\~OF\~ANY\~KIND,\~EITHER\~EXPRESSED\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20OR\~IMPLIED,\~INCLUDING,\~BUT\~NOT\~LIMITED\~TO,\~THE\~IMPLIED\~WARRANTIES\~OF\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20MERCHANTABILITY\~AND\~FITNESS\~FOR\~A\~PARTICULAR\~PURPOSE.\~\~THE\~ENTIRE\~RISK\~AS\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20TO\~THE\~QUALITY\~AND\~PERFORMANCE\~OF\~THE\~PROGRAM\~IS\~WITH\~YOU.\~\~SHOULD\~THE\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20PROGRAM\~PROVE\~DEFECTIVE,\~YOU\~ASSUME\~THE\~COST\~OF\~ALL\~NECESSARY\~SERVICING,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20REPAIR\~OR\~CORRECTION.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~12.\~IN\~NO\~EVENT\~UNLESS\~REQUIRED\~BY\~APPLICABLE\~LAW\~OR\~AGREED\~TO\~IN\~WRITING\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20WILL\~ANY\~COPYRIGHT\~HOLDER,\~OR\~ANY\~OTHER\~PARTY\~WHO\~MAY\~MODIFY\~AND/OR\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20REDISTRIBUTE\~THE\~PROGRAM\~AS\~PERMITTED\~ABOVE,\~BE\~LIABLE\~TO\~YOU\~FOR\~DAMAGES,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20INCLUDING\~ANY\~GENERAL,\~SPECIAL,\~INCIDENTAL\~OR\~CONSEQUENTIAL\~DAMAGES\~ARISING\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20OUT\~OF\~THE\~USE\~OR\~INABILITY\~TO\~USE\~THE\~PROGRAM\~(INCLUDING\~BUT\~NOT\~LIMITED\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20TO\~LOSS\~OF\~DATA\~OR\~DATA\~BEING\~RENDERED\~INACCURATE\~OR\~LOSSES\~SUSTAINED\~BY\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20YOU\~OR\~THIRD\~PARTIES\~OR\~A\~FAILURE\~OF\~THE\~PROGRAM\~TO\~OPERATE\~WITH\~ANY\~OTHER\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20PROGRAMS),\~EVEN\~IF\~SUCH\~HOLDER\~OR\~OTHER\~PARTY\~HAS\~BEEN\~ADVISED\~OF\~THE\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20POSSIBILITY\~OF\~SUCH\~DAMAGES.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~END\~OF\~TERMS\~AND\~CONDITIONS\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~How\~to\~Apply\~These\~Terms\~to\~Your\~New\~Programs\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~If\~you\~develop\~a\~new\~program,\~and\~you\~want\~it\~to\~be\~of\~the\~greatest\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20possible\~use\~to\~the\~public,\~the\~best\~way\~to\~achieve\~this\~is\~to\~make\~it\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20free\~software\~which\~everyone\~can\~redistribute\~and\~change\~under\~these\~terms.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~To\~do\~so,\~attach\~the\~following\~notices\~to\~the\~program.\~\~It\~is\~safest\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20to\~attach\~them\~to\~the\~start\~of\~each\~source\~file\~to\~most\~effectively\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20convey\~the\~exclusion\~of\~warranty;\~and\~each\~file\~should\~have\~at\~least\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20the\~"copyright"\~line\~and\~a\~pointer\~to\~where\~the\~full\~notice\~is\~found.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~<one\~line\~to\~give\~the\~program's\~name\~and\~a\~brief\~idea\~of\~what\~it\~does.>\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~Copyright\~(C)\~<year>\~\~<name\~of\~author>\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~This\~program\~is\~free\~software;\~you\~can\~redistribute\~it\~and/or\~modify\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~it\~under\~the\~terms\~of\~the\~GNU\~General\~Public\~License\~as\~published\~by\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~the\~Free\~Software\~Foundation;\~either\~version\~2\~of\~the\~License,\~or\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~(at\~your\~option)\~any\~later\~version.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~This\~program\~is\~distributed\~in\~the\~hope\~that\~it\~will\~be\~useful,\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~but\~WITHOUT\~ANY\~WARRANTY;\~without\~even\~the\~implied\~warranty\~of\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~MERCHANTABILITY\~or\~FITNESS\~FOR\~A\~PARTICULAR\~PURPOSE.\~\~See\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~GNU\~General\~Public\~License\~for\~more\~details.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~You\~should\~have\~received\~a\~copy\~of\~the\~GNU\~General\~Public\~License\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~along\~with\~this\~program;\~if\~not,\~write\~to\~the\~Free\~Software\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~Foundation,\~Inc.,\~59\~Temple\~Place,\~Suite\~330,\~Boston,\~MA\~\~02111-1307\~\~USA\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20Also\~add\~information\~on\~how\~to\~contact\~you\~by\~electronic\~and\~paper\~mail.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20If\~the\~program\~is\~interactive,\~make\~it\~output\~a\~short\~notice\~like\~this\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20when\~it\~starts\~in\~an\~interactive\~mode:\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~Gnomovision\~version\~69,\~Copyright\~(C)\~year\~name\~of\~author\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~Gnomovision\~comes\~with\~ABSOLUTELY\~NO\~WARRANTY;\~for\~details\~type\~`show\~w'.\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~This\~is\~free\~software,\~and\~you\~are\~welcome\~to\~redistribute\~it\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~\~\~under\~certain\~conditions;\~type\~`show\~c'\~for\~details.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20The\~hypothetical\~commands\~`show\~w'\~and\~`show\~c'\~should\~show\~the\~appropriate\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20parts\~of\~the\~General\~Public\~License.\~\~Of\~course,\~the\~commands\~you\~use\~may\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20be\~called\~something\~other\~than\~`show\~w'\~and\~`show\~c';\~they\~could\~even\~be\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20mouse-clicks\~or\~menu\~items--whatever\~suits\~your\~program.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20You\~should\~also\~get\~your\~employer\~(if\~you\~work\~as\~a\~programmer)\~or\~your\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20school,\~if\~any,\~to\~sign\~a\~"copyright\~disclaimer"\~for\~the\~program,\~if\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20necessary.\~\~Here\~is\~a\~sample;\~alter\~the\~names:\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~Yoyodyne,\~Inc.,\~hereby\~disclaims\~all\~copyright\~interest\~in\~the\~program\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~`Gnomovision'\~(which\~makes\~passes\~at\~compilers)\~written\~by\~James\~Hacker.\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~<signature\~of\~Ty\~Coon>,\~1\~April\~1989\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20\~\~Ty\~Coon,\~President\~of\~Vice\par}
\par\par
\pard{\f2 \fs20This\~General\~Public\~License\~does\~not\~permit\~incorporating\~your\~program\~into\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20proprietary\~programs.\~\~If\~your\~program\~is\~a\~subroutine\~library,\~you\~may\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20consider\~it\~more\~useful\~to\~permit\~linking\~proprietary\~applications\~with\~the\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20library.\~\~If\~this\~is\~what\~you\~want\~to\~do,\~use\~the\~GNU\~Library\~General\par}
\pard{\f2 \fs20Public\~License\~instead\~of\~this\~License.\par}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote raslic}
${\footnote RASLIC}
K{\footnote raslic}
{\b RASLIC}\par\par
If you do not use the GPL, the following license terms apply: {}
\par\par
RasMol License {}
\par\par
Even though the authors of the various documents and software found here {}
have made a good faith effort to ensure that the documents are correct and {}
that the software performs according to its documentation, and we would {}
greatly appreciate hearing of any problems you may encounter, the programs {}
and documents any files created by the programs are provided **AS IS** {}
without any warranty as to correctness, merchantability or fitness for any {}
particular or general use. {}
\par\par
THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY ADVERSE CONSEQUENCES FROM THE USE OF PROGRAMS OR {}
DOCUMENTS OR ANY FILE OR FILES CREATED BY USE OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS {}
LIES SOLELY WITH THE USERS OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS OR FILE OR FILES AND {}
NOT WITH AUTHORS OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS. {}
\par\par
Subject to your acceptance of the conditions stated above, and your respect {}
for the terms and conditions stated in the notices below, if you are not {}
going to make any modifications or create derived works, you are given {}
permission to freely copy and distribute this package, provided you do the {}
following: {}
\par\par
  1.  Either include the complete documentation, especially the file {}
NOTICE, with what you distribute or provide a clear indication where {}
people can get a copy of the documentation; and {}
\par\par
  2.  Please give credit where credit is due citing the version and {}
original authors properly; and {}
\par\par
  3.  Please do not give anyone the impression that the original {}
authors are providing a warranty of any kind. {}
\par\par
If you would like to use major pieces of RasMol in some other program, {}
make modifications to RasMol, or in some other way make what a lawyer {}
would call a "derived work", you are not only permitted to do so, you {}
are encouraged to do so. In addition to the things we discussed above, {}
please do the following: {}
\par\par
  4.  Please explain in your documentation how what you did differs {}
from this version of RasMol; and {}
\par\par
  5.  Please make your modified source code available. {}
\par\par
This version of RasMol is _not_ in the public domain, but it is given {}
freely to the community in the hopes of advancing science.  If you make {}
changes, please make them in a responsible manner, and please offer us {}
the opportunity to include those changes in future versions of RasMol. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote generalnotice}
${\footnote General Notice}
K{\footnote general notice}
{\b General Notice}\par\par
The following notice applies to this work as a whole and to the works {}
included within it: {}
\par\par
* Creative endeavors depend on the lively exchange of ideas. There are laws {}
and customs which establish rights and responsibilities for authors and the {}
users of what authors create. This notice is not intended to prevent you {}
from using the software and documents in this package, but to ensure that {}
there are no misunderstandings about terms and conditions of such use. {}
\par\par
* Please read the following notice carefully. If you do not understand any {}
portion of this notice, please seek appropriate professional legal advice {}
before making use of the software and documents included in this software {}
package. In addition to whatever other steps you may be obliged to take {}
to respect the intellectual property rights of the various parties {}
involved, if you do make use of the software and documents in this package, {}
please give credit where credit is due by citing this package, its authors {}
and the URL or other source from which you obtained it, or equivalent {}
primary references in the literature with the same authors. {}
\par\par
* Some of the software and documents included within this software package {}
are the intellectual property of various parties, and placement in this {}
package does not in any way imply that any such rights have in any way been {}
waived or diminished. {}
\par\par
* With respect to any software or documents for which a copyright exists, {}
ALL RIGHTS ARE RESERVED TO THE OWNERS OF SUCH COPYRIGHT. {}
\par\par
* Even though the authors of the various documents and software found here {}
have made a good faith effort to ensure that the documents are correct and {}
that the software performs according to its documentation, and we would {}
greatly appreciate hearing of any problems you may encounter, the programs {}
and documents and any files created by the programs are provided **AS IS** {}
without any warranty as to correctness, merchantability or fitness for any {}
particular or general use. {}
\par\par
* THE RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY ADVERSE CONSEQUENCES FROM THE USE OF PROGRAMS {}
OR DOCUMENTS OR ANY FILE OR FILES CREATED BY USE OF THE PROGRAMS OR {}
DOCUMENTS LIES SOLELY WITH THE USERS OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS OR FILE {}
OR FILES AND NOT WITH AUTHORS OF THE PROGRAMS OR DOCUMENTS. {}
\par\par
See the files GPL and RASLIC for two alternate ways to license this {}
package. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote rasmolv26notice}
${\footnote RasMol V2.6 Notice}
K{\footnote rasmol v2.6 notice}
{\b RasMol V2.6 Notice}\par\par
The following notice applies to RasMol V 2.6 and older RasMol versions. {}
\par\par
Information in this document is subject to change without notice and {}
does not represent a commitment on the part of the supplier. This package {}
is sold/distributed subject to the condition that it shall not, by way {}
of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise {}
circulated without the supplier's prior consent, in any form of {}
packaging or cover other than that in which it was produced. No {}
part of this manual or accompanying software may be reproduced, {}
stored in a retrieval system on optical or magnetic disk, tape or {}
any other medium, or transmitted in any form or by any means, {}
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise for {}
any purpose other than the purchaser's personal use. {}
\par\par
This product is not to be used in the planning, construction, {}
maintenance, operation or use of any nuclear facility nor the {}
flight, navigation or communication of aircraft or ground support {}
equipment. The author shall not be liable, in whole or in part, for {}
any claims or damages arising from such use, including death, {}
bankruptcy or outbreak of war. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote iucrpolicy}
${\footnote IUCR Policy}
K{\footnote iucr policy}
{\b IUCR Policy}\par\par
{\f2\b The IUCr Policy for the Protection and the Promotion of the STAR File and} {}
{\f2\b CIF Standards for Exchanging and Archiving Electronic Data}. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Overview} {}
\par\par
The Crystallographic Information File (CIF)[1] is a standard for information {}
interchange promulgated by the International Union of Crystallography {}
(IUCr). CIF (Hall, Allen & Brown, 1991) is the recommended method for {}
submitting publications to Acta Crystallographica Section C and reports of {}
crystal structure determinations to other sections of Acta Crystallographica {}
and many other journals. The syntax of a CIF is a subset of the more general {}
STAR File[2] format. The CIF and STAR File approaches are used increasingly {}
in the structural sciences for data exchange and archiving, and are having a {}
significant influence on these activities in other fields. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Statement of intent} {}
\par\par
The IUCr's interest in the STAR File is as a general data interchange {}
standard for science, and its interest in the CIF, a conformant derivative {}
of the STAR File, is as a concise data exchange and archival standard for {}
crystallography and structural science. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Protection of the standards} {}
\par\par
To protect the STAR File and the CIF as standards for interchanging and {}
archiving electronic data, the IUCr, on behalf of the scientific community, {}
\par\par
   * holds the copyrights on the standards themselves, {}
\par\par
   * owns the associated trademarks and service marks, and {}
\par\par
   * holds a patent on the STAR File. {}
\par\par
These intellectual property rights relate solely to the interchange formats, {}
not to the data contained therein, nor to the software used in the {}
generation, access or manipulation of the data. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Promotion of the standards} {}
\par\par
The sole requirement that the IUCr, in its protective role, imposes on {}
software purporting to process STAR File or CIF data is that the following {}
conditions be met prior to sale or distribution. {}
\par\par
   * Software claiming to read files written to either the STAR File or the {}
CIF standard must be able to extract the pertinent data from a file {}
conformant to the STAR File syntax, or the CIF syntax, respectively. {}
\par\par
   * Software claiming to write files in either the STAR File, or the CIF, {}
standard must produce files that are conformant to the STAR File {}
syntax, or the CIF syntax, respectively. {}
\par\par
   * Software claiming to read definitions from a specific data dictionary {}
approved by the IUCr must be able to extract any pertinent definition {}
which is conformant to the dictionary definition language (DDL)[3] {}
associated with that dictionary. {}
\par\par
The IUCr, through its Committee on CIF Standards, will assist any developer {}
to verify that software meets these conformance conditions. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Glossary of terms} {}
\par\par
[1] CIF: {}
\par\par
is a data file conformant to the file syntax defined at {}
http://www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/spec/index.html {}
\par\par
[2] STAR File: {}
\par\par
is a data file conformant to the file syntax defined at {}
http://www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/spec/star/index.html {}
\par\par
[3] DDL: {}
\par\par
is a language used in a data dictionary to define data items in terms {}
of "attributes". Dictionaries currently approved by the IUCr, and the {}
DDL versions used to construct these dictionaries, are listed at {}
http://www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/spec/ddl/index.html {}
\par\par
Last modified: 30 September 2000 {}
\par\par
IUCr Policy Copyright (C) 2000 International Union of Crystallography {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cbflib}
${\footnote CBFLIB}
K{\footnote cbflib}
{\b CBFLIB}\par\par
The following Disclaimer Notice applies to CBFlib V0.1, from which this code {}
in part is derived. {}
\par\par
* The items furnished herewith were developed under the sponsorship of the {}
U.S. Government. Neither the U.S., nor the U.S. D.O.E., nor the Leland {}
Stanford Junior University, nor their employees, makes any warranty, {}
express or implied, or assumes any liability or responsibility for {}
accuracy, completeness or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product {}
or process disclosed, or represents that its use will not infringe {}
privately-owned rights. Mention of any product, its manufacturer, or {}
suppliers shall not, nor is it intended to, imply approval, disapproval, {}
or fitness for any particular use. The U.S. and the University at all times {}
retain the right to use and disseminate the furnished items for any purpose {}
whatsoever. {}
\par\par
Notice 91 02 01 {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cifparse}
${\footnote CIFPARSE}
K{\footnote cifparse}
{\b CIFPARSE}\par\par
Portions of this software are loosely based on the CIFPARSE software package {}
from the NDB at Rutgers University.  See {}
\par\par
   http://ndbserver.rutgers.edu/NDB/mmcif/software {}
\par\par
CIFPARSE is part of the NDBQUERY application, a program component of the {}
Nucleic Acid Database Project [ H. M. Berman, W. K. Olson, D. L. Beveridge, {}
J. K. Westbrook, A. Gelbin, T. Demeny, S. H. Shieh, A. R. Srinivasan, and B. {}
Schneider. (1992). The Nucleic Acid Database: A Comprehensive Relational {}
Database of Three-Dimensional Structures of Nucleic Acids. Biophys J., 63, {}
751-759.], whose cooperation is gratefully acknowledged, especially in the {}
form of design concepts created by J. Westbrook. {}
\par\par
Please be aware of the following notice in the CIFPARSE API: {}
\par\par
This software is provided WITHOUT WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS {}
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR ANY OTHER WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. RUTGERS {}
MAKE NO REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY THAT THE SOFTWARE WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY {}
PATENT, COPYRIGHT OR OTHER PROPRIETARY RIGHT. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chintro}
${\footnote Introduction}
{\fs24\b Introduction}\par\par
RasMol is a molecular graphics program intended for the visualisation of {}
proteins, nucleic acids and small molecules. {}
The program is aimed at display, teaching and generation of {}
publication quality images.   RasMol runs on wide range of architectures {}
and operating systems including Microsoft Windows, Apple {}
Macintosh, UNIX and VMS systems. UNIX and VMS versions require an 8, 24 or {}
32 bit colour X Windows display (X11R4 or later).  The X Windows version of {}
RasMol provides optional support for a hardware dials box and accelerated {}
shared memory communication (via the XInput and MIT-SHM extensions) {}
if available on the current X Server. {}
\par\par
The program reads in a {}
molecule coordinate file and interactively displays the molecule on the {}
screen in a variety of colour schemes and molecule representations. Currently {}
available representations include depth-cued wireframes, 'Dreiding' sticks, {}
spacefilling (CPK) spheres, ball and stick, solid and strand biomolecular {}
ribbons, atom labels and dot surfaces. {}
\par\par
Up to 5 molecules may be loaded and displayed at once.  Any one or all of {}
 the molecules may be rotated and translated. {}
\par\par
The RasMol help facility can be accessed by typing "help <topic>" or "help {}
<topic> <subtopic>" from the command line. A complete list of RasMol commands {}
may be displayed by typing "help commands". A single question mark may also {}
be used to abbreviate the keyword "help".  Please type "help notices" for {}
important notices. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chcomref}
${\footnote Command Reference}
{\fs24\b Command Reference}\par\par
RasMol allows the execution of interactive commands typed at the {}
'{\f2\b RasMol>}' {}
prompt in the terminal window. Each command must be given on {}
a separate line. Keywords are case insensitive and may be entered in {}
either upper or lower case letters. All whitespace characters are {}
ignored except to separate keywords and their arguments. {}
\par\par
All commands may be prefixed by a parenthesized {}
'{\uldb atom expression}{\v chexprs}' {}
to temporarily select certain atoms just for the execution {}
of that one command.  After execution of the command, the {}
previous selection is restored except for the commands {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
, {}
'{\uldb restrict}{\v restrict}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb script}{\v script}'. {}
\par\par
The commands/keywords currently recognised by RasMol are given below. {}
\par\par
{\cellx1200\cellx2400\cellx3600\cellx4800
\intbl
{\uldb backbone}{\v backbone}\cell
{\uldb background}{\v background}\cell
{\uldb bond}{\v bond}\cell
{\uldb bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb cartoon}{\v cartoon}\cell
{\uldb centre}{\v centre}\cell
{\uldb chinese}{\v chinese}\cell
{\uldb clipboard}{\v clipboard}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb colour}{\v colour}\cell
{\uldb colourmode}{\v colourmode}\cell
{\uldb connect}{\v connect}\cell
{\uldb cpk}{\v cpk}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb cpknew}{\v cpknew}\cell
{\uldb defer}{\v defer}\cell
{\uldb define}{\v define}\cell
{\uldb depth}{\v depth}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb dots}{\v dots}\cell
{\uldb echo}{\v echo}\cell
{\uldb english}{\v english}\cell
{\uldb execute}{\v execute}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb exit}{\v exit}\cell
{\uldb french}{\v french}\cell
{\uldb hbonds}{\v hbonds}\cell
{\uldb help}{\v help}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb italian}{\v italian}\cell
{\uldb japanese}{\v japanese}\cell
{\uldb label}{\v label}\cell
{\uldb load}{\v load}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb map}{\v map}\cell
{\uldb molecule}{\v molecule}\cell
{\uldb monitor}{\v pause}\cell
{\uldb notoggle}{\v notoggle}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb pause}{\v pause}\cell
{\uldb pause}{\v play}\cell
{\uldb print}{\v print}\cell
{\uldb quit}{\v quit}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb record}{\v record}\cell
{\uldb refresh}{\v refresh}\cell
{\uldb renumber}{\v renumber}\cell
{\uldb reset}{\v reset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb restrict}{\v restrict}\cell
{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}\cell
{\uldb rotate}{\v rotate}\cell
{\uldb save}{\v save}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb script}{\v script}\cell
{\uldb select}{\v select}\cell
{\uldb set}{\v set}\cell
{\uldb show}{\v show}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb slab}{\v slab}\cell
{\uldb source}{\v source}\cell
{\uldb spacefill}{\v spacefill}\cell
{\uldb spanish}{\v spanish}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb ssbonds}{\v ssbonds}\cell
{\uldb star}{\v star}\cell
{\uldb stereo}{\v stereo}\cell
{\uldb strands}{\v strands}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb structure}{\v structure}\cell
{\uldb surface}{\v surface}\cell
{\uldb trace}{\v trace}\cell
{\uldb translate}{\v translate}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb unbond}{\v unbond}\cell
{\uldb wireframe}{\v wireframe}\cell
{\uldb write}{\v write}\cell
{\uldb zap}{\v zap}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb zoom}{\v zoom}\cell\cell
\row\pard\par\trowd}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote backbone}
${\footnote Backbone}
K{\footnote backbone}
{\b Backbone}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
backbone \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
backbone <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b backbone}' {}
command permits the representation of a polypeptide {}
backbone as a series of bonds connecting the adjacent alpha carbons of {}
each amino acid in a chain. The display of these backbone 'bonds' is {}
turned on and off by the command parameter in the same way as with the {}
'{\uldb wireframe}{\v wireframe}' {}
command. The command {}
'{\f2\b backbone off}' {}
turns off the selected 'bonds', and {}
'{\f2\b backbone on}' {}
or with a number turns them on. The number can be used {}
to specify the cylinder radius of the representation in either Angstrom {}
or RasMol units. A parameter value of 500 (2.0 Angstroms) or above {}
results in a "Parameter value too large" error. Backbone objects may be {}
coloured using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb colour backbone}{\v colour}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
The reserved word backbone is also used as a predefined set ("help sets") {}
and as a parameter to the {}
'{\uldb set hbond}{\v sethbonds}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb set ssbond}{\v setssbonds}' {}
commands. The {}
RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b trace}' {}
renders a smoothed backbone, in contrast to {}
'{\f2\b backbone}' {}
which connects alpha carbons with straight lines. {}
\par\par
The backbone may be displayed with dashed lines by use of the {}
'{\f2\b backbone dash}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote background}
${\footnote Background}
K{\footnote background}
{\b Background}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
background <colour>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b background}' {}
command is used to set the colour of the "canvas" background. The {}
colour may be given as either a colour name or a comma separated {}
triple of Red, Green and Blue (RGB) components enclosed in square {}
brackets. Typing the command {}
'{\uldb help colours}{\v help}' {}
will give a list of the predefined colour names recognised by RasMol. {}
When running under X Windows, RasMol also recognises colours in the {}
X server's colour name database. {}
\par\par
The {}
'{\f2\b background}' {}
command is synonymous with the RasMol {}
'{\uldb set background}{\v setbackground}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote bond}
${\footnote Bond}
K{\footnote bond}
{\b Bond}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
bond <number> <number> +\line\tab
bond <number> <number> pick\line\tab
bond rotate \{<boolean>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b bond <number> <number> +}' {}
adds the designated bond to the drawing, increasing the bond order {}
if the bond already exists.  The command {}
'{\f2\b bond <number> <number> pick}' {}
selects the two atoms specified by the atom serial numbers {}
as the two ends of a bond around which the {}
'{\uldb rotate bond <angle>}{\v rotate}' {}
command will be applied.  If no bond exists, it is created. {}
\par\par
Rotation around a previously picked bond may be specified by the {}
'{\uldb rotate bond <angle>}{\v rotate}' {}
command, or may also be controlled with the mouse, using the {}
'{\f2\b bond rotate on/off}' {}
or the equivalent {}
'{\uldb rotate bond on/off}{\v rotate}' {}
commands. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote bulgarian}
${\footnote Bulgarian}
K{\footnote bulgarian}
{\b Bulgarian}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
Bulgarian \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Bulgarian}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the Bulgarian versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cartoon}
${\footnote Cartoon}
K{\footnote cartoon}
{\b Cartoon}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
cartoon \{<number>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b cartoon}' {}
command does a display of a molecule {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}' {}
as Richardson (MolScript) style protein {}
'{\f2\b cartoons}', {}
implemented as thick (deep) ribbons. The {}
easiest way to obtain a cartoon representation of a protein is {}
to use the {}
'{\f2\b Cartoons}' {}
option on the {}
'{\f2\b Display}' {}
menu. The {}
'{\f2\b cartoon}' {}
command represents the currently selected residues {}
as a deep ribbon with width specified by the command's argument. {}
Using the command without a parameter results in the ribbon's {}
width being taken from the protein's secondary structure, {}
as described in the {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}' {}
command. By default, the C-termini of beta-sheets are displayed {}
as arrow heads. This may be enabled and disabled using the {}
'{\uldb set cartoons}{\v setcartoon}' {}
command. {}
The depth of the cartoon may be adjusted using the {}
'{\uldb set cartoons <number>}{\v setcartoon}' {}
command. The {}
'{\uldb set cartoons}{\v setcartoon}' {}
command without any parameters returns these two options {}
to their default values. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote center}
#{\footnote centre}
${\footnote Centre}
K{\footnote centre}
{\b Centre}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
centre \{<expression>\} \{translate|center\}\line\tab
center \{<expression>\} \{translate|center\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b centre}' {}
command defines the point about which the {}
'{\uldb rotate}{\v rotate}' {}
command and the scroll bars rotate the current molecule. Without a {}
parameter the centre command resets the centre of rotation to be the {}
centre of gravity of the molecule. If an atom expression is specified, {}
RasMol rotates the molecule about the centre of gravity of the set of {}
atoms specified by the expression. Hence, if a single atom is specified {}
by the expression, that atom will remain 'stationary' during rotations. {}
\par\par
Type {}
'{\uldb help expression}{\v help}' {}
for more information on RasMol atom expressions. {}
\par\par
Alternatively the centring may be given as a comma separated triple of {}
[CenX, CenY, CenZ] offsets in RasMol units (1/250 of an Angstrom) from {}
the centre of gravity.  The triple must be enclosed in square brackets. {}
\par\par
The optional forms {}
'{\f2\b centre ... translate}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b centre ... center}' {}
may be used to specify use of a translated centre of rotation (not {}
necessarily in the centre of the canvas) or a centre of rotation {}
which is placed at the centre of the canvas.  Starting with {}
RasMol 2.7.2, the default is {}
to center the new axis on the canvas. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chinese}
${\footnote Chinese}
K{\footnote chinese}
{\b Chinese}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
Chinese \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Chinese}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the Chinese versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote clipboard}
${\footnote Clipboard}
K{\footnote clipboard}
{\b Clipboard}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
clipboard\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b clipboard}' {}
command places a copy of the currently displayed image on the local {}
graphics 'clipboard'. Note: this command is not yet supported on {}
UNIX or VMS machines. It is intended to make transfering images {}
between applications easier under Microsoft Windows or on an Apple {}
Macintosh. {}
\par\par
When using RasMol on a UNIX or VMS system this functionality may be {}
achieved by generating a raster image in a format that can be read {}
by the receiving program using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb write}{\v write}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote color}
#{\footnote colour}
${\footnote Colour}
K{\footnote colour}
{\b Colour}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
colour \{<object>\} <colour>\line\tab
color \{<object>\} <colour>\par
}\pard\par
Colour the atoms (or other objects) of the selected region. The colour may {}
be given as either a colour name or a comma separated triple of Red, Green {}
and Blue (RGB) components enclosed in square brackets. Typing the command {}
'{\uldb help colours}{\v help}' {}
will give a list of all the predefined colour names recognised {}
by RasMol. {}
\par\par
Allowed objects are {}
'{\f2\b atoms}', {}
'{\f2\b bonds}', {}
'{\uldb backbone}{\v backbone}', {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}', {}
'{\uldb labels}{\v label}', {}
'{\uldb dots}{\v dots}', {}
'{\uldb hbonds}{\v hbonds}', {}
'{\uldb map}{\v map}', {}
and {}
'{\uldb ssbonds}{\v ssbonds}'. {}
If no object is specified, the default keyword {}
'{\f2\b atom}' {}
is assumed. {}
Some colour schemes are defined for certain object types. The colour scheme {}
'{\f2\b none}' {}
can be applied to all objects except atoms and dots, stating that the selected {}
objects have no colour of their own, but use the colour of their associated {}
atoms (i.e. the atoms they connect). {}
'{\f2\b Atom}' {}
objects can also be coloured by {}
'{\uldb alt}{\v altcolours}', {}
'{\uldb amino}{\v aminocolours}', {}
'{\uldb chain}{\v chaincolours}', {}
'{\uldb charge}{\v chargecolours}', {}
'{\uldb cpk}{\v cpkcolours}', {}
'{\uldb group}{\v groupcolours}', {}
'{\uldb model}{\v nmrmodelcolours}', {}
'{\uldb shapely}{\v shapelycolours}', {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structurecolours}', {}
'{\uldb temperature}{\v temperaturecolours}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb user}{\v usercolours}'. {}
Hydrogen bonds can also be coloured by {}
'{\uldb type}{\v hbondtypecolours}' {}
and dot surfaces can also be coloured by {}
'{\uldb electrostatic potential}{\v potentialcolours}'. {}
For more information type {}
'{\uldb help colour <colour>}{\v chcolours}'. {}
Map objects may be coloured by specific color of by nearest atom. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnode colourmode}
#{\footnote colourmode}
${\footnote ColourMode}
K{\footnote colourmode}
{\b ColourMode}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
colourmode \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
colormode \{<boolean>\}\par
}\pard\par
ColourMode allows the user to switch between using the new {}
'{\uldb colour}{\v colour}' {}
method. At present, the new coloring technique is the same as {}
the old one, but to preserve compatibility for older scripts {}
it may be wise to add a "colormode on" near the top of your {}
script somewhere, if the script was designed for version 2.7.3 {}
of RasMol or earlier. The new color method, when completed, {}
aims to fix a few bugs in the coloring routines. {}
\par\par
#{\footnote connect}
${\footnote Connect}
K{\footnote connect}
{\b Connect}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
connect \{<boolean>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b connect}' {}
command is used to force RasMol to (re)calculate the connectivity {}
of the current molecule. {}
If the original input file contained connectivity information, this {}
is discarded. The command {}
'{\f2\b connect false}' {}
uses a fast heuristic {}
algorithm that is suitable for determining bonding in large {}
bio-molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. The command {}
'{\f2\b connect true}' {}
uses a slower more accurate algorithm based upon {}
covalent radii that is more suitable to small molecules containing {}
inorganic elements or strained rings. If no parameters are given, {}
RasMol determines which algorithm to use based on the number of atoms {}
in the input file. Greater than 255 atoms causes RasMol to use the {}
faster implementation. This is the method used to determine bonding, {}
if necessary, when a molecule is first read in using the {}
'{\uldb load}{\v load}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote defer}
${\footnote Defer}
K{\footnote defer}
{\b Defer}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
defer <name> <command to defer>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b defer}' {}
command adds the command given to the macro with given name, {}
if no name is given, the command is added to the macro with a {}
blank name. The command {}
'{\f2\b zap}' {}
is a special case. In that case the macro is erased. If no name is {}
given the command must begin with a selection, e.g. {}
'{\f2\b defer (selection).spacefill}' {}
\par\par
The deferred commands accumulated under the given name can be executed {}
using the {}
'{\uldb execute}{\v execute}' {}
command {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote define}
${\footnote Define}
K{\footnote define}
{\b Define}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
define <identifier> <expression>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b define}' {}
command allows the user to associate an arbitrary set of atoms with a {}
unique identifier. This allows the definition of user-defined sets. These {}
sets are declared statically, i.e. once defined the contents of the set {}
do not change, even if the expression defining them depends on the {}
current transformation and representation of the molecule. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote depth}
${\footnote Depth}
K{\footnote depth}
{\b Depth}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
depth \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
depth <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b depth}' {}
command enables, disables or positions the back-clipping plane of the {}
molecule. The program only draws those portions of the {}
molecule that are closer to the viewer than the clipping plane. {}
Integer values range from zero at the very back of the molecule to {}
100 which is completely in front of the molecule. Intermediate values {}
determine the percentage of the molecule to be drawn. {}
\par\par
This command interacts with the {}
'{\uldb slab <value>}{\v slab}' {}
command, which clips to the front of a given z-clipping plane. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote dots}
${\footnote Dots}
K{\footnote dots}
{\b Dots}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
dots \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
dots \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b dots}' {}
command is used to generate a van der Waals' dot surface around the {}
currently selected atoms. Dot surfaces display regularly spaced points {}
on a sphere of van der Waals' radius about each selected atom. Dots that {}
would are 'buried' within the van der Waals' radius of any other atom {}
(selected or not) are not displayed. {}
The command {}
'{\f2\b dots on}' {}
deletes any existing dot surface and generates a dots surface around {}
the currently selected atom set with a default dot density of 100. The {}
command {}
'{\f2\b dots off}' {}
deletes any existing dot surface. The dot density may be {}
specified by providing a numeric parameter between 1 and 1000. This {}
value approximately corresponds to the number of dots on the surface {}
of a medium sized atom. {}
\par\par
By default, the colour of each point on a dot surface is the colour {}
of its closest atom at the time the surface is generated. The colour {}
of the whole dot surface may be changed using the {}
'{\uldb colour dots}{\v colour}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote echo}
${\footnote Echo}
K{\footnote echo}
{\b Echo}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
echo \{<string>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b echo}' {}
command is used to display a message in the RasMol command/terminal {}
window. The string parameter may optionally be delimited in double {}
quote characters. If no parameter is specified, the {}
'{\f2\b echo}' {}
command displays a blank line. This command is particularly useful {}
for displaying text from within a RasMol {}
'{\uldb script}{\v script}' {}
file. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote english}
${\footnote English}
K{\footnote english}
{\b English}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
English \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b English}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the English versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote execute}
${\footnote Execute}
K{\footnote execute}
{\b Execute}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
execute <name>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b execute}' {}
command: {}
\par\par
1.  saves the old poise of the molecule (translation, {}
rotation and zoom) {}
\par\par
2. executes the specified macro suppressing both screen {}
updates and recording {}
\par\par
3. animates motion of the newly rendered molecule linearly {}
from the old poise to the new poise {}
\par\par
The macro must have been previously defined by calls to the {}
'{\uldb defer}{\v defer}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
The animation of the motion depends on the prior settings of the {}
'{\uldb record}{\v record}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote french}
${\footnote French}
K{\footnote french}
{\b French}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
French \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b French}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the French versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote hbond}
#{\footnote hbonds}
${\footnote HBonds}
K{\footnote hbonds}
{\b HBonds}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
hbonds \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
hbonds <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b hbond}' {}
command is used to represent the hydrogen bonding of the protein {}
molecule's backbone. This information is useful in assessing the {}
protein's secondary structure. Hydrogen bonds are represented as {}
either dotted lines or cylinders between the donor and acceptor {}
residues. The first time the {}
'{\f2\b hbond}' {}
command is used, the program searches the structure of the {}
molecule to find hydrogen bonded residues and reports the number of bonds {}
to the user. The command {}
'{\f2\b hbonds on}' {}
displays the selected 'bonds' as dotted lines, and the {}
'{\f2\b hbonds off}' {}
turns off their display. The colour of hbond objects may be changed {}
by the {}
'{\uldb colour hbond}{\v colour}' {}
command. Initially, each hydrogen bond has the colours of its connected {}
atoms. {}
\par\par
By default the dotted lines are drawn between the accepting oxygen and {}
the donating nitrogen. By using the {}
'{\uldb set hbonds}{\v sethbonds}' {}
command the alpha carbon positions of the appropriate residues may be {}
used instead. This is especially useful when examining proteins in {}
backbone representation. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote help}
${\footnote Help}
K{\footnote help}
{\b Help}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
help \{<topic> \{<subtopic>\}\}\line\tab
? \{<topic> \{<subtopic>\}\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b help}' {}
command provides on-line help on the given topic. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote italian}
${\footnote Italian}
K{\footnote italian}
{\b Italian}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
Italian \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Italian}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the Italian versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote japanese}
${\footnote Japanese}
K{\footnote japanese}
{\b Japanese}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
Japanese \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Japanese}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the Japanese versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote labels}
#{\footnote label}
${\footnote Label}
K{\footnote label}
{\b Label}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
label \{<string>\}\line\tab
label <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b label}' {}
command allows an arbitrary formatted text string to be {}
associated with each currently selected atom.  This string may contain {}
embedded 'expansion specifiers' which display properties of the atom {}
being labelled. An expansion specifier consists of a '%' character {}
followed by a single alphabetic character specifying the property to be {}
displayed (similar to C's printf syntax). {}
An actual '%' character may be displayed by using the expansion {}
specifier '%%'. {}
\par\par
Atom labelling for the currently selected atoms may be turned off with {}
the command {}
'{\f2\b label off}'. {}
By default, if no string is given as a parameter, RasMol uses labels {}
appropriate for the current molecule. {}
RasMol uses the label '%n%r:%c.%a' if the molecule contains more than {}
one chain, '%e%i' if the molecule has only a single residue (a small {}
molecule) and '%n%r.%a' otherwise. {}
\par\par
The colour of each label may be changed using the {}
'{\uldb colour label}{\v colour}' {}
command. By default, each label is drawn in the same colour as the atom {}
to which it is attached. The size and spacing of the displayed text {}
may be changed using the {}
'{\uldb set fontsize}{\v setfontsize}' {}
command.  The width of the strokes in the displayed text may be changed {}
 using the {}
'{\uldb set fontstroke}{\v setfontstroke}' {}
 command. {}
\par\par
The following table lists the current expansion specifiers: {}
\par\par
{\cellx500\cellx1000\cellx5500
\intbl
%a\cell   \cell Atom Name\cell\row\intbl
%b\cell %t\cell B-factor/Temperature\cell\row\intbl
%c\cell %s\cell Chain Identifier\cell\row\intbl
%e\cell   \cell Element Atomic Symbol\cell\row\intbl
%i\cell   \cell Atom Serial Number\cell\row\intbl
%n\cell   \cell Residue Name\cell\row\intbl
%r\cell   \cell Residue Number\cell\row\intbl
%M\cell   \cell NMR Model Number (with leading "/")\cell\row\intbl
%A\cell   \cell Alternate Conformation Identifier (with leading ";")\cell\row
\pard\par\trowd}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote load}
${\footnote Load}
K{\footnote load}
{\b Load}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
load \{<format>\} <filename>\line\tab
}\pard\par
Load a molecule coordinate file into RasMol. Valid molecule file {}
formats are {}
'{\f2\b pdb}' {}
(Protein Data Bank format), {}
'{\f2\b mdl}' {}
(Molecular Design Limited's MOL file format), {}
'{\f2\b alchemy}' {}
(Tripos' Alchemy file format), {}
'{\f2\b mol2}' {}
(Tripos' Sybyl Mol2 file format), {}
'{\f2\b charmm}' {}
(CHARMm file format), {}
'{\f2\b xyz}' {}
(MSC's XMol XYZ file format), {}
'{\f2\b mopac}' {}
(J. P. Stewart's MOPAC file format) or {}
'{\f2\b cif}' {}
(IUCr CIF or mmCIF file format). If no file format is specified, {}
'{\f2\b PDB}', {}
'{\f2\b CIF}', {}
or {}
'{\f2\b mmCIF}' {}
is assumed by default. Up to 20 molecules may be loaded at a time. {}
If CHEM_COMP ligand models are included in an mmCIF file, they will be loaded {}
as NMR models, first giving the all the NMR models for model {}
coordinates if specified and then giving all the NMR models for {}
ideal model coordinates. {}
\par\par
To delete a molecule prior to loading another use the RasMol {}
'{\uldb zap}{\v zap}' {}
command.  To select a molecule for manipulation use the RasMol {}
'{\uldb molecule <n>}{\v molecule}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
The {}
'{\f2\b load}' {}
command selects all the atoms in the molecule, centres it on the {}
screen and renders it as a CPK coloured wireframe model. If the molecule {}
contains no bonds (i.e. contains only alpha carbons), it is drawn as {}
an alpha carbon backbone. If the file specifies fewer bonds than atoms, {}
RasMol determines connectivity using the {}
'{\uldb connect}{\v connect}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
The {}
'{\f2\b load inline}' {}
command also allows the storing of atom coordinates in scripts {}
to allow better integration with WWW browsers. A load command {}
executed inside a script file may specify the keyword {}
'{\f2\b inline}' {}
instead of a conventional filename. This option specifies that {}
the coordinates of the molecule to load are stored in the same {}
file as the currently executing commands. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote map}
${\footnote Map}
K{\footnote map}
{\b Map}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} \{<map_subcommand> <parameters>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map}' {}
commands manipulate electron density maps in coordination {}
with the display of molecules.  These commands are very {}
memory intensive and may not work on machines with {}
limited memory.  Each molecule may have as many maps {}
as available memory permits.  Maps may be read from {}
files or generated from Gaussian density distributions {}
around atoms. {}
\par\par
'{\uldb map colour}{\v mapcolour}', {}
to colour a map according to a given colour scheme, {}
'{\uldb map generate}{\v mapgenerate}', {}
to generate a map from selected atoms based on pseudo-Gaussians, {}
'{\uldb map level}{\v maplevel}', {}
to set the contouring level for selected maps, {}
'{\uldb map load}{\v mapload}', {}
to load a map from a file, {}
'{\uldb map mask}{\v mapmask}' {}
to designate a mask for the selected maps, {}
'{\uldb map resolution}{\v mapresolution}', {}
to set the resolution for contouring selected maps, {}
'{\uldb map restrict}{\v maprestrict}', {}
to select one or more maps and to disable all others, {}
'{\uldb map save}{\v mapsave}', {}
to save map information to a file, {}
'{\uldb map scale}{\v mapscale}', {}
'{\uldb control the scaling of pseudo-Gaussians when generating maps}{\v to}', {}
'{\uldb map select}{\v mapselect}', {}
to select one or more maps, {}
'{\uldb map show}{\v mapshow}', {}
to display information about one or more maps or about the {}
parameters to be used in generating or loading the next map, {}
'{\uldb map spacing}{\v mapspacing}', {}
to set the spacing betwen contour lines of selected maps, {}
'{\uldb map spread}{\v mapspread}', {}
to set the variance of the Gaussians for map generation as a fraction {}
of the atomic radius, and {}
'{\uldb map zap}{\v mapzap}' {}
to delete previously generated or loaded maps. {}
\par\par
The effect of {}
'{\uldb map generate}{\v mapgenerate}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb map load}{\v mapload}' {}
commands is modified by the {}
'{\uldb map mask}{\v mapmask}' {}
command which limits the portion of the display space {}
that can be considered for display of maps. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapcolour}
${\footnote Map colour}
K{\footnote map colour}
{\b Map colour}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} colour <colour_scheme>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map colour}' {}
command colours the selected maps according to the specified {}
colour scheme.  The colour scheme may be a colour name or {}
and RBG triple in brackets, or the keyword {}
'{\f2\b atom}' {}
to cause the map points to be coloured by the color of the {}
nearest atom. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapgenerate}
${\footnote Map generate}
K{\footnote map generate}
{\b Map generate}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} generate \{LRsurf\} dots\line\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} generate \{LRsurf\} mesh\line\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} generate \{LRsurf\} surface
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map generate}' {}
command generates a map from whatever atoms are currently selected, {}
by summing electron densities approximated by Gaussian distributions. {}
The height of each Gaussian is determined by the setting of the {}
'{\uldb  map scale}{\v mapscale}' {}
command. {}
In the default of map scale true, each Gaussian has a height proportional {}
element type of the atom. {}
If the optional 'LRSurf' parameter is given or if map scale false {}
has been executed, each Gaussian is scaled so that {}
the Gaussian contour level 1 is at the van der Waals radius. {}
In either case a standard deviation determined by the {}
most recently specified spread or resolution is used.  If a non-zero spread has been {}
given the radius of the atom is multiplied by the spread to find the {}
standard deviation.  The default is 2/3rds.  If a resolution {}
has been given, the spread is inferred as 2/3rds of the resolution. {}
\par\par
For example, if the resolution is given as 1., and the atom in question {}
is a Carbon with a van der Waals radius of 468 RasMol units (1.87 Angstroms), {}
the inferred spead is .6667, and the standard deviation of the Gaussian {}
is taken as 1.25 Angstroms. {}
\par\par
If the spread has been set to zero, the spread for each atom is determined {}
from the van der Waals radius and the probe atom radius to simulate the {}
effect of a Lee-Richards surface. {}
\par\par
If no specific map was given by the map selector, the new map is {}
given the next available map number. {}
\par\par
If a specific map was given by the map selector, the new map replaces {}
that map.  If more than one map was given by the map selector, the {}
new map replaces the lowest numbered of the selected maps.  In any {}
case the new map becomes the currently selected map. {}
\par\par
The map is displayed as dots, mesh or a surface, depending on the last {}
map rendering mode selected or the mode selected on the command itself. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote maplevel}
${\footnote Map level}
K{\footnote map level}
{\b Map level}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} level \{MEAN\} <number>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map level}' {}
command sets the contour level to be used in creating subsequent {}
representations of generated or loaded maps.  If the keyword MEAN {}
in used the level is relative to the mean of the map data.  Otherwise {}
the level is absolute. {}
\par\par
In general, a lower level results in a map containing more of the {}
displayed volume, while a higher level results in a map containing {}
less of the displayed volume. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapload}
${\footnote Map load}
K{\footnote map load}
{\b Map load}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\}  load <filename>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map load}' {}
command loads a map file into RasMol.  The valid formats are {}
CCP4 map format and imgCIF format. {}
\par\par
If no specific map was given by the map selector, the new map is {}
given the next available map number. {}
\par\par
If a specific map was given by the map selector, the new map replaces {}
that map.  If more than one map was given by the map selector, the {}
new map replaces the lowest numbered of the selected maps.  In any {}
case the new map becomes the currently selected map. {}
\par\par
The map is displayed as dots, mesh or a surface depending on the {}
last map rendering mode selected. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapmask}
${\footnote Map mask}
K{\footnote map mask}
{\b Map mask}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} mask selected\line\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} mask <number>\line\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} mask none
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map mask}' {}
command specifies a mask to be used to limit the display space {}
to be used for making representations of other maps or removes {}
an earlier mask specification. {}
\par\par
The 'selected' option indicates that the mask is to be created {}
from the currently selected atoms.  The '<number>' option indicates {}
that the mask is to be copied from the map of the number specified. {}
The 'none' option removes the previously specified mask, if any. {}
\par\par
The map selector specifies the map or maps to which the specified mask {}
will the applied.  For example, 'map next mask selected' specifies {}
that the currently selected atoms are to be used to generate a {}
mask to be applied to any maps created by subsequent 'map load' {}
or 'map generate' commands. {}
\par\par
Any map may be used as a mask.  The portions of the mask map greater than {}
than or equal to the average value of the mask map allow the values of the {}
map being masked to be used as given.  The portions of the mask {}
map lower than the average value of the mask map cause the values of {}
the map being masked to be treated as if they were equal to the {}
lowest data value of the map being masked. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapresolution}
${\footnote Map resolution}
K{\footnote map resolution}
{\b Map resolution}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} resolution <number>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map resolution}' {}
command specifies the resolution in RasMol units or, {}
if a number containing a decimal point is given, the {}
resolution in Angstroms to be used in generating and {}
in representing maps. {}
\par\par
The resolution is used at the map spacing for {}
representations of maps, indicating the separation {}
between contour levels (see the {}
'{\uldb map spacing}{\v mapspacing}' {}
command) and to infer the map spread to be used in {}
generated maps from selected atoms (see the {}
'{\uldb map spread}{\v mapspread}' {}
command).  The map spread is set to two thirds of {}
the specified resolution. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote maprestrict}
${\footnote Map restrict}
K{\footnote map restrict}
{\b Map restrict}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\}  restrict
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map restrict}' {}
command selects particular maps to make them active for {}
subsequent map commands.  This is similar to the {}
'{\uldb map select}{\v mapselect}' {}
command, but does disables the display of the {}
maps that were not selected. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapsave}
${\footnote Map save}
K{\footnote map save}
{\b Map save}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\}  save <filename>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map save}' {}
command saves an imgCIF map file. {}
\par\par
If no specific map was given by the map selector, the currently {}
selected maps and their masks are written to the file, one {}
map and mask pair per data block. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapscale}
${\footnote Map scale}
K{\footnote map scale}
{\b Map scale}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\}  scale <boolean>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map scale}' {}
command selects the scaling of pseudo-Gaussians in the {}
'{\uldb map generate}{\v mapgenerate}' {}
commands. {}
In the default of map scale true, each Gaussian has a height proportional {}
element type of the atom. {}
If map scale false has been executed, each Gaussian is scaled so that {}
the Gaussian contour level 1 is at the van der Waals radius. {}
In either case a standard deviation determined by the {}
most recently specified spread or resolution is used. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapselect}
${\footnote Map select}
K{\footnote map select}
{\b Map select}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\}  select \{atom \{within\} \{add\} \{search_radius\}\}
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map select}' {}
command selects particular maps to make them active for {}
subsequent map commands.  This is similar to the {}
'{\uldb map restrict}{\v maprestrict}' {}
command, but does not disable the display of the {}
maps that were not selected. {}
\par\par
If the optional {}
'{\f2\b atom}' {}
parameter is given, the command selects the atoms with centres closest to the {}
map points.  The radius of the search may be specified by the parameter {}
'{\f2\b search_radius}'. {}
The default is to look for atoms within 4 Angstroms plus the probe radius. {}
If the optional {}
'{\f2\b within}' {}
parameter is given, the new selection is taken from within the currently {}
selected atoms.  If the options {}
'{\f2\b add}' {}
parameter is given, the new selection is added to the currently selected atoms. {}
The default is to search within all atoms. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapshow}
${\footnote Map show}
K{\footnote map show}
{\b Map show}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} show
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map show}' {}
command causes information about the maps specified by {}
the map selector to be written to the command window. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapspacing}
${\footnote Map spacing}
K{\footnote map spacing}
{\b Map spacing}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} spacing <number>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map spacing}' {}
command specifies the spacing to be used between contour lines {}
in creating representations of maps.  The spacing is typically {}
 given in Angstroms with a decimal point, but may also be {}
specified in RasMol units (250ths of an Angstom) as an {}
integer.  For maps loaded in grid coordinates that spacing {}
is parallel to the cell edges.  The default spacing is {}
one half Angstrom. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapspread}
${\footnote Map spread}
K{\footnote map spread}
{\b Map spread}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} spread <number>
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map spread}' {}
command specifies the reciprocal of the number of {}
standard deviations per radius to be used in {}
generating maps as sums of Gaussians centered {}
on atomic positions.  The default spread is one {}
two thirds (i.e. each radius covers 1.5 standard deviations). {}
\par\par
If the spread has been set to zero, the spread for each atom is determined {}
from the van der Waals radius and the probe atom radius to simulate the {}
effect of a Lee-Richards surface. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mapzap}
${\footnote Map zap}
K{\footnote map zap}
{\b Map zap}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
map \{<map_selector>\} zap
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b map zap}' {}
command removes the data and representations of the {}
maps specified by the map selector.  The map numbers {}
of maps that have not been removed are not changed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote molecule}
${\footnote Molecule}
K{\footnote molecule}
{\b Molecule}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
molecule <number>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b molecule}' {}
command selects one of up to 5 previously loaded molecules {}
for active manipulation.  While all the molcules are displayed {}
and may be rotated collectively (see the {}
'{\uldb rotate all}{\v rotate}' {}
command), only one molecule at a time {}
time is active for manipulation by the commands which {}
control the details of rendering. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote monitor}
${\footnote Monitor}
K{\footnote monitor}
{\b Monitor}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
monitor <number> <number>\line\tab
monitor \{<boolean>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b monitor}' {}
command allows the display of distance monitors. A distance {}
monitor is a dashed (dotted) line between an arbitrary pair {}
of atoms, optionally labelled by the distance between them. {}
The RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b monitor <number> <number>}' {}
adds such a distance monitor between the two atoms specified by the atom {}
serial numbers given as parameters {}
\par\par
Distance monitors are turned off with the command {}
'{\f2\b monitors off}'. {}
By default, monitors display the {}
distance between its two end points as a label at the centre of {}
the monitor. These distance labels may be turned off with the {}
command {}
'{\uldb set monitors off}{\v setmonitor}', {}
and re-enabled with the command {}
'{\uldb set monitors on}{\v setmonitor}'. {}
Like most other representations, {}
the colour of a monitor is taken from the colour of its end points unless {}
specified by the {}
'{\uldb colour monitors}{\v colour}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
Distance monitors may also be added to a molecule interactively with {}
the mouse, using the {}
'{\uldb set picking monitor}{\v setpicking}' {}
command. Clicking on an atom results {}
in its being identified on the rasmol command line. In addition {}
every atom picked increments a modulo counter such that, in monitor {}
mode, every second atom displays the distance between this atom and {}
the previous one. The shift key may be used to form distance monitors {}
between a fixed atom and several consecutive positions. A distance {}
monitor may also be removed (toggled) by selecting the appropriate {}
pair of atom end points a second time. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote notoggle}
${\footnote Notoggle}
K{\footnote notoggle}
{\b Notoggle}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
notoggle \{<boolean>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b NoToggle}' {}
command enables or disables the use of the toggle ability {}
that is used by some of the other RasMol commands. {}
When no boolean value is specified, NoToggle mode is ENABLED. {}
When NoToggle mode is ENABLED, all toggle functionality is {}
DISABLED. To turn it off, one must explicitly set {}
'{\f2\b notoggle off}'. {}
\par\par
Some commands which use the toggle feature are: {}
'{\uldb ColourMode}{\v colourmode}'. {}
More functions that utilize this capability may be added {}
at a later date. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote pause}
${\footnote Pause}
K{\footnote pause}
{\b Pause}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
pause\par\tab
wait\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b pause}' {}
command is used in script files to stop the script file for local {}
manipulation by a mouse, until any key is pushed to restart the {}
script file. {}
'{\f2\b Wait}' {}
is synonymous with {}
'{\f2\b pause}'. {}
This command may be executed in RasMol script files to suspend {}
the sequential execution of commands and allow the user to examine {}
the current image.   When RasMol executes a {}
'{\f2\b pause}' {}
command in a script file, it suspends  execution of the rest {}
of the file, refreshes the image on the screen and allows the {}
manipulation of the image using the mouse and scroll  bars, or {}
resizing of the graphics window.  Once a key is pressed, control {}
returns to the script file at the line following the {}
'{\f2\b pause}' {}
command.  While a script is suspended the molecule may be rotated, {}
translated, scaled, slabbed and picked as usual, but all menu {}
commands are disabled. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote play}
${\footnote Play}
K{\footnote play}
{\b Play}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
print play \{from <time>\} \{until <time>\} \{\{on|off|eject\} \{<type>\} <medium>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b play}' {}
command specifies the recording medium from which to play back a movie. {}
The playback frame start time is given in seconds to millisecond precision. {}
Since we are working on computers, the medium is specified as a set of files, {}
each marked with the playback frame start time in milliseconds as part of the {}
name. The place in the name at which to look for the playback frame start {}
time in milliseconds is marked by the characters "ssssss" with an {}
appropriate number of digits.  RasMol accepts either upper or lower case {}
s's or decimal digits to mark the place for the time.  The play off and play {}
eject commands effectively remove the specified medium from use. If no medium {}
is specified, play off suspends playing and play on resumes playing. {}
Normally play starts immediately and runs to the end of the medium. However, {}
if play off and/or or some combination of play from and play until is entered {}
before {}
'{\f2\b play type medium}', {}
those settings will be used. {}
\par\par
As of release 2.7.5, RasMol support play from scripts and data files. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote print}
${\footnote Print}
K{\footnote print}
{\b Print}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
print\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b print}' {}
command sends the currently displayed image to the local default printer {}
using the operating system's native printer driver. Note: this command {}
is not yet supported under UNIX or VMS. It is intended to take advantage {}
of Microsoft Windows and Apple Macintosh printer drivers. For example, {}
this allows images to be printed directly on a dot matrix printer. {}
\par\par
When using RasMol on a UNIX or VMS system this functionality may be {}
achieved by either generating a PostScript file using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb write ps}{\v write}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb write vectps}{\v write}' {}
commands and printing that or generating a raster image file and using a {}
utility to dump that to the local printer. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote exit}
#{\footnote quit}
${\footnote Quit}
K{\footnote quit}
{\b Quit}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
quit\line\tab
exit\par
}\pard\par
Exit from the RasMol program. The RasMol commands {}
'{\f2\b exit}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b quit}' {}
are synonymous, except within nested scripts.  In that case, {}
'{\f2\b exit}' {}
terminates only the current level, while {}
'{\f2\b quit}' {}
terminates all nested levels of scripts. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote record}
${\footnote Record}
K{\footnote record}
{\b Record}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
print record \{from <time>\} \{until <time>\} \{\{on|off\} \{<type>\} <medium>\}\par
\tab record \{mouse|motion|appearance\} \{on|off\}
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b record}' {}
command specifies the recording medium to hold the movie. Since we are {}
working on computers, the medium is specified as a template for a set of {}
files, each marked with the playback frame start time in milliseconds {}
(rather than as seconds to avoid embedding a decimal point) as part of {}
the name. The place in the name to be replaced with the playback frame {}
start time in milliseconds is marked by the characters "ssssss" with {}
an appropriate number of digits. RasMol accepts either upper or lower case {}
s's or decimal digits to mark the place for the time.  The record off {}
commands remove the specified medium from use. If no medium is specified, {}
record off suspends recording and record on resumes recording with the {}
next available time on the same medium. The screen is the default medium {}
and is, by default, on. Writing to disk must be explicitly specified so {}
that the disk does not get filled up unintentionally. The type of a {}
recording medium may be an image type such as gif, pict or png to record {}
the actual screen images or script to record the RasMol commands used to {}
generate the frames. {}
\par\par
Normally recording starts at playback frame start time 0 seconds. {}
A non-zero starting time in seconds can be specified with the {}
'{\f2\b record from}' {}
command as in {}
'{\f2\b record from 25}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b record from 37.25}' {}
to help in organizing scenes of movies to be assembled later in an {}
appropriate order. {}
The {}
'{\f2\b record until}' {}
command allows an upper limit to be set on recording time in seconds. {}
The default is to have no limit. Issuing the commands {}
\par\par
'{\f2\b record from 600}' {}
\par\par
'{\f2\b record until 1800}' {}
\par\par
would result in a 20 minute movie segment intended to start 10 {}
minutes into a longer movie. {}
These commands allow control over rewriting selected time segments. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote refresh}
${\footnote Refresh}
K{\footnote refresh}
{\b Refresh}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
refresh
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b refresh}' {}
command redraws the current image.  This is useful in scripts {}
to ensure application of a complex list of parameter changes. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote renum}
#{\footnote renumber}
${\footnote Renumber}
K{\footnote renumber}
{\b Renumber}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
renumber \{\{-\} <value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b renumber}' {}
command sequentially numbers the residues in a macromolecular chain. {}
The optional parameter specifies the value of the first residue in the {}
sequence. By default, this value is one. For proteins, {}
each amino acid is numbered consecutively from the N terminus to the C {}
terminus. For nucleic acids, each base is numbered from the 5' terminus {}
to the 3' terminus. All chains in the current database are renumbered and gaps {}
in the original sequence are ignored. The starting value for numbering may {}
be negative. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote reset}
${\footnote Reset}
K{\footnote reset}
{\b Reset}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
reset\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b reset}' {}
command restores the original viewing transformation {}
and centre of rotation. The scale is set to its default value, {}
'{\uldb zoom 100}{\v zoom}', {}
the centre of rotation is set to the geometric centre of the currently {}
loaded molecule, {}
'{\uldb centre all}{\v centre}', {}
this centre is translated to the middle of the screen and {}
the viewpoint set to the default orientation. {}
\par\par
This command should not be mistaken for the RasMol {}
'{\uldb zap}{\v zap}' {}
command which deletes the currently stored molecule, returning the {}
program to its initial state. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote restrict}
${\footnote Restrict}
K{\footnote restrict}
{\b Restrict}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
restrict \{<expression>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b restrict}' {}
command both defines the currently selected region of the {}
molecule and disables the representation of (most of) those parts of the {}
molecule no longer selected.  All subsequent RasMol commands that modify {}
a molecule's colour or representation affect only the currently selected {}
region. The parameter of a {}
'{\f2\b restrict}' {}
command is a RasMol atom expression that is evaluated for every atom {}
of the current molecule. This command is very similar to the RasMol {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
command, except {}
'{\f2\b restrict}' {}
disables the {}
'{\uldb wireframe}{\v wireframe}', {}
'{\uldb spacefill}{\v spacefill}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb backbone}{\v backbone}' {}
representations in the non-selected region. {}
\par\par
Type "help expression" for more information on RasMol atom expressions or {}
see section {}
'{\uldb Atom Expressions}{\v chexprs}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote ribbon}
#{\footnote ribbons}
${\footnote Ribbons}
K{\footnote ribbons}
{\b Ribbons}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
ribbons \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
ribbons <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b ribbons}' {}
command displays the currently loaded protein or nucleic acid as a {}
smooth solid "ribbon" surface passing along the backbone of the protein. {}
The ribbon is drawn between each amino acid whose alpha carbon is {}
currently selected. The colour of the ribbon is changed by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb colour ribbon}{\v colour}' {}
command. If the current ribbon colour is {}
'{\f2\b none}' {}
(the default), the colour is taken from the alpha carbon at each {}
position along its length. {}
\par\par
The width of the ribbon at each position is determined by the optional {}
parameter in the usual RasMol units. By default the width of the ribbon {}
is taken from the secondary structure of the protein or a constant value {}
of 720 (2.88 Angstroms) for nucleic acids. {}
The default width of protein alpha helices and beta sheets is 380 (1.52 {}
Angstroms) and 100 (0.4 Angstroms) for turns and random coil. The {}
secondary structure assignment is either from the PDB file or calculated {}
using the DSSP algorithm as used by the {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structure}' {}
command. This command is similar to the RasMol command {}
'{\uldb strands}{\v strands}' {}
which renders the biomolecular ribbon as parallel depth-cued curves. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote rotate}
${\footnote Rotate}
K{\footnote rotate}
{\b Rotate}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
rotate <axis> \{-\} <value>\line\tab
rotate bond \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
rotate molecule \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
rotate all \{<boolean>\}\par
}\pard\par
Rotate the molecule about the specified axis. {}
Permitted values for the axis parameter are {}
"{\f2\b x}", "{\f2\b y}", "{\f2\b z}" and "{\f2b bond}". {}
The integer parameter states the angle in degrees for the structure to {}
be rotated. For the X and Y axes, positive values move the closest point {}
up and right, and negative values move it down and left, respectively. For {}
the Z axis, a positive rotation acts clockwise and a negative angle {}
anti-clockwise. {}
\par\par
Alternatively, this command may be used to specify which rotations {}
the mouse or dials will control.  If {}
'{\f2\b rotate bond true}' {}
is selected, the horizontal scroll bar will control rotation around {}
the axis selected by the {}
'{\uldb bond src dst pick}{\v bond}' {}
command.  If {}
'{\f2\b rotate all true}' {}
is selected, and multiple molecules have been loaded, then all molecules {}
will rotate together.  In all other cases, the mouseand dials control the {}
the rotation of the molecule selected by the {}
'{\uldb molecule n}{\v molecule}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote russian}
${\footnote Russian}
K{\footnote russian}
{\b Russian}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
Russian \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Russian}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the Russian versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote save}
${\footnote Save}
K{\footnote save}
{\b Save}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
save \{pdb\} <filename>\line\tab
save mdl <filename>\line\tab
save alchemy <filename>\line\tab
save xyz <filename>\par
}\pard\par
Save the currently selected set of atoms in a Protein {}
Data Bank (PDB), MDL, Alchemy(tm) or XYZ format file. {}
The distinction between this command and the RasMol {}
'{\uldb write}{\v write}' {}
command has been dropped. The only difference is that without a format {}
specifier the {}
'{\f2\b save}' {}
command generates a {}
'{\f2\b PDB}' {}
file and the {}
'{\uldb write}{\v write}' {}
command generates a {}
'{\f2\b GIF}' {}
image. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote script}
${\footnote Script}
K{\footnote script}
{\b Script}\par\par
#{\footnote source}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
script <filename>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b script}' {}
command reads a set of RasMol commands sequentially from a {}
text file and executes them. This allows sequences of commonly used {}
commands to be stored and performed by single command. A RasMol script {}
file may contain a further script command up to a maximum "depth" of 10, {}
allowing complicated sequences of actions to be executed. RasMol {}
ignores all characters after the first '#' character on each line {}
allowing the scripts to be annotated. Script files are often also {}
annotated using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb echo}{\v echo}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
The most common way to generate a RasMol script file is to use the {}
'{\uldb write script}{\v write}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb write rasmol}{\v write}' {}
commands to output the sequence of commands that are needed to {}
regenerate the current view, representation and colouring of the {}
currently displayed molecule. {}
\par\par
The RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b source}' {}
is synonymous with the {}
'{\f2\b script}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote select}
${\footnote Select}
K{\footnote select}
{\b Select}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
select \{<expression>\}\par
}\pard\par
Define the currently selected region of the molecule. All subsequent RasMol {}
commands that manipulate a molecule or modify its colour or representation {}
only affect the currently selected region. The parameter of a {}
'{\f2\b select}' {}
command is a RasMol expression that is evaluated for every atom of the {}
current molecule. The currently selected (active) region of the molecule {}
are those atoms that cause the expression to evaluate true. To select {}
the whole molecule use the RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b select all}'. {}
The behaviour of the {}
'{\f2\b select}' {}
command without any parameters is determined by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v sethetero}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb hydrogen}{\v set}' {}
parameters. {}
\par\par
Type "help expression" for more information on RasMol atom expressions or {}
see section {}
'{\uldb Atom Expressions}{\v chexprs}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote set}
${\footnote Set}
K{\footnote set}
{\b Set}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set <parameter> \{<option>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set}' {}
command allows the user to alter various internal program parameters {}
such as those controlling rendering options. Each parameter has its {}
own set or permissible parameter options. Typically, omitting the {}
paramter option resets that parameter to its default value. A list of {}
valid parameter names is given below. {}
\par\par
{\cellx1200\cellx2400\cellx3600\cellx4800
\intbl
{\uldb ambient}{\v setambient}\cell
{\uldb axes}{\v setaxes}\cell
{\uldb background}{\v setbackground}\cell
{\uldb backfade}{\v setbackfade}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb bondmode}{\v setbondmode}\cell
{\uldb bonds}{\v setbonds}\cell
{\uldb booundbox}{\v setboundbox}\cell
{\uldb cartoons}{\v setcartoon}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb cisangle}{\v setcisangle}\cell
{\uldb display}{\v setdisplay}\cell
{\uldb fontsize}{\v setfontsize}\cell
{\uldb fontstroke}{\v setfontstroke}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb hbonds}{\v sethbonds}\cell
{\uldb hetero}{\v sethetero}\cell
{\uldb hourglass}{\v sethourglass}\cell
{\uldb hydrogen}{\v sethydrogen}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb kinemage}{\v setkinemage}\cell
{\uldb menus}{\v setmenus}\cell
{\uldb monitor}{\v setmonitor}\cell
{\uldb mouse}{\v setmouse}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb picking}{\v setpicking}\cell
{\uldb play...}{\v setplay}\cell
{\uldb radius}{\v setradius}\cell
{\uldb record...}{\v setrecord}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb shadepower}{\v setshadepower}\cell
{\uldb shadow}{\v setshadow}\cell
{\uldb slabmode}{\v setslabmode}\cell
{\uldb solvent}{\v setsolvent}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb specular}{\v setspecular}\cell
{\uldb specpower}{\v setspecpower}\cell
{\uldb ssbonds}{\v setssbonds}\cell
{\uldb stereo}{\v setstereo}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb strands}{\v setstrands}\cell
{\uldb transparent}{\v settransparent}\cell
{\uldb unitcell}{\v setunitcell}\cell
{\uldb vectps}{\v setvectps}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb write}{\v setwrite}\cell
\cell
\cell
\cell
\row}
\pard\par\trowd
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote show}
${\footnote Show}
K{\footnote show}
{\b Show}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
show information\line\tab
show centre\line\tab
show phipsi\line\tab
show RamPrint\line\tab
show rotation\line\tab
show selected \{ group | chain | atom \}\line\tab
show sequence\line\tab
show symmetry\line\tab
show translation\line\tab
show zoom\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b show}' {}
command display details of the status of the currently {}
loaded molecule. The command {}
'{\f2\b show information}' {}
lists the molecule's name, {}
classification, PDB code and the number of atoms, chains, groups it contains. {}
If hydrogen bonding, disulphide bridges or secondary structure have been {}
determined, the number of hbonds, ssbonds, helices, ladders and turns {}
are also displayed, respectively. The command {}
'{\f2\b show centre}' {}
shows any non-zero centering values selected by the {}
'{\uldb centre [CenX, CenY, CenZ]}{\v centre}' {}
command. The command {}
'{\f2\b show phipsi}' {}
shows the phi and psi angles of the currently selected residues and {}
the omega angles of cis peptide bonds. The command {}
'{\f2\b show RamPrint}' {}
(or 'show RPP' or 'show RamachandranPrinterPlot') shows a simple {}
Ramachandran printer plot in the style of Frances Bernstein's fisipl {}
program.  The command {}
'{\f2\b show rotation}' {}
(or 'show rot' or 'show 'rotate') shows the currently selected values {}
of z, y, x and bond rotations, if any. {}
The command {}
'{\f2\b show selected}' {}
(or 'show selected group' or 'show selected chain' or  'show selected atom' ) {}
shows the groups (default), chains or atoms of the current selection. {}
The command {}
'{\f2\b show sequence}' {}
lists the residues that comprise each chain of the molecule.  The command {}
'{\f2\b show symmetry}' {}
shows the space group and unit cell of the molecule. The command {}
'{\f2\b show translation}' {}
shows any non-zero translation values selected by the {}
'{\uldb translate <axis> <value>}{\v translate}' {}
command. The command {}
'{\f2\b show zoom}' {}
shows any non-zero zoom value selected by the {}
'{\uldb zoom <value>}{\v zoom}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote slab}
${\footnote Slab}
K{\footnote slab}
{\b Slab}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
slab \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
slab <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b slab}' {}
command enables, disables or positions the z-clipping plane of the {}
molecule. The program only draws those portions of the {}
molecule that are further from the viewer than the slabbing plane. {}
Integer values range from zero at the very back of the molecule to {}
100 which is completely in front of the molecule. Intermediate values {}
determine the percentage of the molecule to be drawn. {}
\par\par
This command interacts with the {}
'{\uldb depth <value>}{\v depth}' {}
command, which clips to the rear of a given z-clipping plane. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cpk}
#{\footnote cpknew}
#{\footnote spacefill}
${\footnote Spacefill}
K{\footnote spacefill}
{\b Spacefill}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
spacefill \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
spacefill temperature\line\tab
spacefill user\line\tab
spacefill <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b spacefill}' {}
command is used to represent all of the currently selected atoms as solid {}
spheres. This command is used to produce both union-of-spheres and {}
ball-and-stick models of a molecule. The command, {}
'{\f2\b spacefill true}', {}
the default, represents each atom as a sphere of van der Waals radius. {}
The command {}
'{\f2\b spacefill off}' {}
turns off the representation of the selected atom as spheres. A sphere {}
radius may be specified as an integer in RasMol units (1/250th Angstrom) {}
or a value containing a decimal point. A value of 500 (2.0 {}
Angstroms) or greater results in a "Parameter value too large" error. {}
\par\par
The {}
'{\f2\b temperature}' {}
option sets the radius of each sphere to the value stored in its temperature {}
field. Zero or negative values have no effect and values greater than {}
2.0 are truncated to 2.0.  The {}
'{\f2\b user}' {}
option allows the radius of each sphere to be specified by additional lines {}
in the molecule's PDB file using Raster 3D's COLOUR record extension. {}
\par\par
The RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b cpk}' {}
is synonymous with the {}
'{\f2\b spacefill}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
The RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b cpknew}' {}
is synonymous with the {}
'{\f2\b spacefill}' {}
command, except that a slightly different set of colours is used. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote spanish}
${\footnote Spanish}
K{\footnote spanish}
{\b Spanish}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
Spanish \par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Spanish}' {}
command sets the menus and messages to the Spanish versions. {}
\par\par
This command may not work correctly unless appropriate fonts {}
have been installed.  The commands {}
'{\uldb Bulgarian}{\v bulgarian}', {}
'{\uldb Chinese}{\v chinese}', {}
'{\uldb English}{\v english}', {}
'{\uldb French}{\v french}', {}
'{\uldb Italian}{\v italian}', {}
'{\uldb Russian}{\v russian}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb Spanish}{\v spanish}' {}
may be used to select Bulgarian, Chinese, English, French, {}
Italian, Japanese, Russian and Spanish menus and messages if the {}
appropriate fonts have been installed. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote ssbond}
#{\footnote ssbonds}
${\footnote SSBonds}
K{\footnote ssbonds}
{\b SSBonds}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
ssbonds \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
ssbonds <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b ssbonds}' {}
command is used to represent the disulphide bridges of the protein {}
molecule as either dotted lines or cylinders between the connected {}
cysteines. The first time that the {}
'{\f2\b ssbonds}' {}
command is used, the program searches the structure of the protein to {}
find half-cysteine pairs (cysteines whose sulphurs are within 3 Angstroms {}
of each other) and reports the number of bridges to the user. The command {}
'{\f2\b ssbonds on}' {}
displays the selected "bonds" as dotted lines, and the command {}
'{\f2\b ssbonds off}' {}
disables the display of ssbonds in the currently selected area. Selection {}
of disulphide bridges is identical to normal bonds, and may be adjusted {}
using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb set bondmode}{\v setbondmode}' {}
command. The colour of disulphide bonds may be changed using the {}
'{\uldb colour ssbonds}{\v colour}' {}
command. By default, each disulphide bond has the colours of its connected {}
atoms. {}
\par\par
By default disulphide bonds are drawn between the sulphur atoms within {}
the cysteine groups. By using the {}
'{\uldb set ssbonds}{\v setssbonds}' {}
command the position of the cysteine's alpha carbons may be used instead. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote star}
${\footnote Star}
K{\footnote star}
{\b Star}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
star \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
star temperature\line\tab
star user\line\tab
star <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b star}' {}
command is used to represent all of the currently selected atoms as {}
stars (six strokes, one each in the x, -x, y, -y, z and -z directions). {}
The commands {}
'{\f2\b select not bonded}' {}
followed by {}
'{\f2\b star 75}' {}
are useful to mark unbonded atoms in a {}
'{\uldb wireframe}{\v wireframe}' {}
display with less overhead than provided by {}
'{\uldb spacefill 75}{\v spacefill}'. {}
This can be done automatically for all subsequent wireframe {}
displays with the command {}
'{\uldb set bondmode not bonded}{\v setbondmode}'. {}
\par\par
The command {}
'{\f2\b star true}', {}
the default, represents each atom as a star with strokes {}
length equal to van der Waals radius. {}
The command {}
'{\f2\b star off}' {}
turns off the representation of the selected atom as stars. A star {}
stroke length may be specified as an integer in RasMol units {}
(1/250th Angstrom) {}
or a value containing a decimal point. A value of 500 (2.0 {}
Angstroms) or greater results in a "Parameter value too large" error. {}
\par\par
The {}
'{\f2\b temperature}' {}
option sets the stroke length of each star to the value stored {}
in its temperature {}
field. Zero or negative values have no effect and values greater than {}
2.0 are truncated to 2.0.  The {}
'{\f2\b user}' {}
option allows the stroke length of each star to be specified by {}
additional lines {}
in the molecule's PDB file using Raster 3D's COLOUR record extension. {}
\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\uldb spacefill}{\v spacefill}' {}
command can be used for more artistic rendering of atoms as spheres. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote stereo}
${\footnote Stereo}
K{\footnote stereo}
{\b Stereo}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
stereo on\line\tab
stereo [-] <number>\line\tab
stereo off\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b stereo}' {}
command provides side-by-side stereo display of images. Stereo {}
viewing of a molecule may be turned on (and off) either by {}
selecting {}
'{\f2\b Stereo}' {}
from the {}
'{\f2\b Options}' {}
menu, or by {}
typing the commands {}
'{\f2\b stereo on}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b stereo off}'. {}
\par\par
Starting with RasMol version 2.7.2.1, the {}
'{\f2\b Stereo}' {}
menu selection and the command {}
'{\f2\b stereo}' {}
without arguments cycle from the initial state of {}
'{\f2\b stereo off}' {}
to {}
'{\f2\b stereo on}' {}
in cross-eyed mode to {}
'{\f2\b stereo on}' {}
in wall-eyed mode and then back to {}
'{\f2\b stereo off}'. {}
\par\par
The separation angle between {}
the two views may be adjusted with the {}
'{\uldb set stereo [-] <number>}{\v setstereo}' {}
command, where positive values result in crossed eye {}
viewing and negative values in relaxed (wall-eyed) viewing. {}
The inclusion of {}
'{\f2\b [-] <number>}' {}
in the {}
'{\f2\b stereo}' {}
command, as for example in {}
'{\f2\b stereo 3}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b stereo -5}', {}
also controls angle and direction. {}
\par\par
The stereo command is only partially {}
implemented. When stereo is turned on, the image is not properly {}
recentred. (This can be done with a {}
'{\uldb translate x -<number>}{\v translate}' {}
 command.) {}
It is not supported in vector PostScript output files, is not {}
saved by the {}
'{\f2\b write script}' {}
command, and in {}
general is not yet properly interfaced with several other {}
features of the program. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote strands}
${\footnote Strands}
K{\footnote strands}
{\b Strands}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
strands \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
strands <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b strands}' {}
command displays the currently loaded protein or nucleic acid as a {}
smooth "ribbon" of depth-cued curves passing along the backbone of the {}
protein. The ribbon is composed of a number of strands that run parallel {}
to one another along the peptide plane of each residue. The ribbon is {}
drawn between each amino acid whose alpha carbon is currently selected. {}
The colour of the ribbon is changed by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb colour ribbon}{\v colour}' {}
command. If the current ribbon colour is {}
'{\f2\b none}' {}
(the default), the colour is taken from the alpha carbon at each {}
position along its length. The central and outermost {}
strands may be coloured independently using the {}
'{\uldb colour ribbon1}{\v colour}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb colour ribbon2}{\v colour}' {}
commands, respectively. The number of strands in the ribbon may be {}
altered using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb set strands}{\v setstrands}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
The width of the ribbon at each position is determined by the optional {}
parameter in the usual RasMol units. By default the width of the ribbon {}
is taken from the secondary structure of the protein or a constant value {}
of 720 for nucleic acids (which produces a ribbon 2.88 Angstroms wide). {}
The default width of protein alpha helices and beta sheets is 380 (1.52 {}
Angstroms) and 100 (0.4 Angstroms) for turns and random coil. The {}
secondary structure assignment is either from the PDB file or calculated {}
using the DSSP algorithm as used by the {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structure}' {}
command. This command is similar to the RasMol command {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}' {}
which renders the biomolecular ribbon as a smooth shaded surface. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote structure}
${\footnote Structure}
K{\footnote structure}
{\b Structure}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
structure\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b structure}' {}
command calculates secondary structure assignments {}
for the currently loaded protein. If the original PDB file contained {}
structural assignment records (HELIX, SHEET and TURN) these are discarded. {}
Initially, the hydrogen bonds of the current molecule are found, if this {}
hasn't been done already. The secondary structure is then determined using {}
Kabsch and Sander's DSSP algorithm. Once finished the program reports the {}
number of helices, strands and turns found. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote surface}
${\footnote Surface}
K{\footnote surface}
{\b Surface}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
structure molecule <value>\line\tab
structure solvent <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b surface}' {}
command renders a Lee-Richards molecular surface resulting {}
from rolling a probe atom on the selected atoms. {}
The value given specifies the radius of the probe. {}
If given in the first form, the evolute of the surface {}
of the probe is shown (the solvent excluded surface). {}
If given in the second form, the envelope of the {}
positions of the center of the probe is shown {}
(the solvent accessible surface). {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote trace}
${\footnote Trace}
K{\footnote trace}
{\b Trace}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
trace \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
trace <value>\line\tab
trace temperature\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b trace}' {}
command displays a smooth spline between  consecutive alpha {}
carbon positions.  This spline does not pass exactly through {}
the alpha carbon position of each residue, but  follows the {}
same path as {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}', {}
'{\uldb strands}{\v strands}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb cartoons}{\v cartoon}'. {}
Note that residues may be displayed as {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}', {}
'{\uldb strands}{\v strands}', {}
'{\uldb cartoons}{\v cartoon}' {}
or as a {}
'{\f2\b trace}'. {}
Enabling one of these {}
representations disables the others. However, a residue {}
may be displayed simultaneously as backbone and as one of {}
the above representations.  This may change in future {}
versions of RasMol.  Prior to version 2.6, {}
'{\f2\b trace}' {}
was synonymous with {}
'{\f2\b backbone}'. {}
\par\par
'{\f2\b Trace temperature}' {}
displays the backbone as a wider cylinder {}
at high temperature factors and thinner at lower.  This {}
representation is useful to X-ray crystallographers and NMR spectroscopists. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote translate}
${\footnote Translate}
K{\footnote translate}
{\b Translate}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
translate <axis> \{-\} <value>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b translate}' {}
command moves the position of the centre of the molecule on the {}
screen. The axis parameter specifies along which axis the molecule {}
is to be moved and the integer parameter specifies the absolute {}
position of the molecule centre from the middle of the screen. {}
Permitted values for the axis parameter are {}
"{\f2\b x}", "{\f2\b y}" and "{\f2\b z}". {}
Displacement values must be between -100 and 100 which correspond to {}
moving the current molecule just off the screen. A positive {}
"{\f2\b x}" {}
displacement moves the molecule to the right, and a positive {}
"{\f2\b y}" {}
displacement moves the molecule down the screen. The pair of commands {}
'{\f2\b translate x 0}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b translate y 0}' {}
centres the molecule on the screen. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote unbond}
${\footnote UnBond}
K{\footnote unbond}
{\b UnBond}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
unbond <number> <number>\line\tab
unbond\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b unbond <number> <number>}' {}
removes the designated bond from the drawing. {}
\par\par
The command {}
'{\f2\b unbond}' {}
without arguments removes a bond previously picked by the {}
'{\uldb bond <number> <number> pick}{\v bond}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote wireframe}
${\footnote Wireframe}
K{\footnote wireframe}
{\b Wireframe}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
wireframe \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
wireframe <value> \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b wireframe}' {}
command represents each bond within the selected region of the molecule {}
as a cylinder, a line or a depth-cued vector. The display of bonds {}
as depth-cued vectors (drawn darker the further away from the viewer) {}
is turned on by the command {}
'{\f2\b wireframe}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b wireframe on}'. {}
The selected bonds are displayed as cylinders by specifying a radius {}
either as an integer in RasMol units or containing a decimal point as {}
a value in Angstroms.  A parameter value of 500 (2.0 Angstroms) or {}
above results in an "Parameter value too large" error. Bonds may be {}
coloured using the {}
'{\uldb colour bonds}{\v colour}' {}
command. {}
 {}
If the selected bonds involved atoms of alternate conformers then {}
the bonds are narrowed in the middle to a radius of .8 of the specified {}
radius (or to the radius specifed as the optional second parameter). {}
\par\par
Non-bonded atoms, which could become invisible in an {}
ordinary {}
'{\f2\b wireframe}' {}
display can be marked by a preceding {}
'{\uldb set bondmode not bonded}{\v setbondmode}' {}
command.  If nearly co-linear bonds to atoms cause them to be {}
difficult to see in a wireframe display, the {}
'{\uldb set bondmode all}{\v setbondmode}' {}
command will add markers for {}
'{\f2\b all}' {}
atoms in subsequent {}
'{\f2\b wireframe}' {}
command executions. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote write}
${\footnote Write}
K{\footnote write}
{\b Write}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
write \{<format>\} <filename>\par
}\pard\par
Write the current image to a file in a standard format. Currently {}
supported image file formats include {}
'{\f2\b bmp}' {}
(Microsoft bitmap) and {}
'{\f2\b gif}' {}
(Compuserve GIF), {}
'{\f2\b iris}' {}
(IRIS RGB), {}
'{\f2\b ppm}' {}
(Portable Pixmap), {}
'{\f2\b ras}' {}
(Sun rasterfile), {}
'{\f2\b ps}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b epsf}' {}
(Encapsulated PostScript), {}
'{\f2\b monops}' {}
(Monochrome Encapsulated PostScript), {}
'{\f2\b pict}' {}
(Apple PICT), {}
'{\f2\b vectps}' {}
(Vector Postscript).  The {}
'{\f2\b write}' {}
command may also be used to generate command scripts for other graphics {}
programs. The format {}
'{\f2\b script}' {}
writes out a file containing the RasMol {}
'{\uldb script}{\v script}' {}
commands to reproduce the current image. The format {}
'{\f2\b molscript}' {}
writes out the commands required to render the current view of the {}
molecule as ribbons in Per Kraulis' Molscript program and the format {}
'{\f2\b kinemage}' {}
the commands for David Richardson's program Mage.  The following {}
formats are useful for further processing: {}
'{\f2\b povray}' {}
(POVRay 2), {}
'{\f2\b povray3}' {}
(POVRay 3 -- under development), {}
'{\f2\b vrml}' {}
(VRML file). {}
Finally, several {}
formats are provided to provide phi-psi data for listing or for {}
'{\f2\b phipsi}' {}
(phi-psi data as an annotated list with cis omegas), {}
'{\f2\b ramachan}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b RDF}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b RamachandranDataFile}' {}
(phi-psi data as columns of numbers for gnuplot), {}
'{\f2\b RPP}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b RamachandranPrinterPlot}' {}
(phi-psi data as a printer plot). {}
\par\par
The distinction between this command and the RasMol {}
'{\uldb save}{\v save}' {}
command has been dropped. The only difference is that without a format {}
specifier the {}
'{\uldb save}{\v save}' {}
command generates a {}
'{\f2\b PDB}' {}
file and the {}
'{\f2\b write}' {}
command generates a {}
'{\f2\b GIF}' {}
image. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote zap}
${\footnote Zap}
K{\footnote zap}
{\b Zap}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
zap\par
}\pard\par
Deletes the contents of the current database and resets parameter {}
variables to their initial default state. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote zoom}
${\footnote Zoom}
K{\footnote zoom}
{\b Zoom}\par\par
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
zoom \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
zoom <value>\par
}\pard\par
Change the magnification of the currently displayed image. Boolean {}
parameters either magnify or reset the scale of current molecule. An {}
integer parameter specifies the desired magnification as a percentage {}
of the default scale. The minimum parameter value is 10; the maximum {}
parameter value is dependent upon the size of the molecule being {}
displayed. For medium sized proteins this is about 500. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chsetopt}
${\footnote Internal Parameters}
{\fs24\b Internal Parameters}\par\par
RasMol has a number of internal parameters that may be modified using the {}
'{\uldb set}{\v set}' {}
command. These parameters control a number of program options such as {}
rendering options and mouse button mappings. {}
\par\par
A complete list of internal parameter names is given below. {}
\par\par
{\cellx1200\cellx2400\cellx3600\cellx4800
\intbl
{\uldb ambient}{\v setambient}\cell
{\uldb axes}{\v setaxes}\cell
{\uldb background}{\v setbackground}\cell
{\uldb backfade}{\v setbackfade}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb bondmode}{\v setbondmode}\cell
{\uldb bonds}{\v setbonds}\cell
{\uldb booundbox}{\v setboundbox}\cell
{\uldb cartoons}{\v setcartoon}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb cisangle}{\v setcisangle}\cell
{\uldb display}{\v setdisplay}\cell
{\uldb fontsize}{\v setfontsize}\cell
{\uldb fontstroke}{\v setfontstroke}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb hbonds}{\v sethbonds}\cell
{\uldb hetero}{\v sethetero}\cell
{\uldb hourglass}{\v sethourglass}\cell
{\uldb hydrogen}{\v sethydrogen}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb kinemage}{\v setkinemage}\cell
{\uldb menus}{\v setmenus}\cell
{\uldb monitor}{\v setmonitor}\cell
{\uldb mouse}{\v setmouse}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb picking}{\v setpicking}\cell
{\uldb play...}{\v setplay}\cell
{\uldb radius}{\v setradius}\cell
{\uldb record...}{\v setrecord}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb shadepower}{\v setshadepower}\cell
{\uldb shadow}{\v setshadow}\cell
{\uldb slabmode}{\v setslabmode}\cell
{\uldb solvent}{\v setsolvent}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb specular}{\v setspecular}\cell
{\uldb specpower}{\v setspecpower}\cell
{\uldb ssbonds}{\v setssbonds}\cell
{\uldb stereo}{\v setstereo}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb strands}{\v setstrands}\cell
{\uldb transparent}{\v settransparent}\cell
{\uldb unitcell}{\v setunitcell}\cell
{\uldb vectps}{\v setvectps}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb write}{\v setwrite}\cell
\cell
\cell
\cell
\row}
\pard\par\trowd
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setambient}
${\footnote Set Ambient}
K{\footnote set ambient}
{\b Set Ambient}\par\par
K{\footnote ambient}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set ambient \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b ambient}' {}
parameter is used to control the amount of ambient (or surrounding) {}
light in the scene. The {}
'{\f2\b ambient}' {}
value must be between 0 and 100. It controls the percentage intensity {}
of the darkest shade of an object. For a solid object, this is the {}
intensity of surfaces facing away from the light source or in shadow. {}
For depth-cued objects this is the intensity of objects furthest from {}
the viewer. {}
\par\par
This parameter is commonly used to correct for monitors with different {}
"gamma values" (brightness), to change how light or dark a hardcopy {}
image appears when printed or to alter the feeling of depth for {}
wireframe or ribbon representations. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setaxes}
${\footnote Set Axes}
K{\footnote set axes}
{\b Set Axes}\par\par
K{\footnote axes}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set axes <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b axes}' {}
parameter controls the display of orthogonal coordinate axes on {}
the current display. The coordinate axes are those used in the {}
molecule data file, and the origin is the centre of the molecule's {}
bounding box. The {}
'{\f2\b set axes}' {}
command is similar to the commands {}
'{\uldb set boundbox}{\v setboundbox}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb set unitcell}{\v setunitcell}' {}
that display the bounding box and the crystallographic unit cell, {}
respectively. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setbackfade}
${\footnote Set Backfade}
K{\footnote set backfade}
{\b Set Backfade}\par\par
K{\footnote backfade}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set background <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b backfade}' {}
parameter is used to control backfade to the specified background {}
colour, rather than black.  This is controlled by the commands {}
'{\f2\b set backfade on}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b set backfade off}'. {}
For example, this may be used to generate depth-cued images that {}
fade to white, rather than black. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setbackground}
${\footnote Set Background}
K{\footnote set background}
{\b Set Background}\par\par
K{\footnote background}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set background <colour>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b background}' {}
parameter is used to set the colour of the "canvas" background. The {}
colour may be given as either a colour name or a comma separated {}
triple of Red, Green, Blue (RGB) components enclosed in square {}
brackets. Typing the command {}
'{\uldb help colours}{\v help}' {}
will give a list of the predefined colour names recognised by RasMol. {}
When running under X Windows, RasMol also recognises colours in the {}
X server's colour name database. {}
\par\par
The command {}
'{\f2\b set background}' {}
is synonymous with the RasMol command {}
'{\uldb background}{\v background}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setbondmode}
${\footnote Set BondMode}
K{\footnote set bondmode}
{\b Set BondMode}\par\par
K{\footnote bondmode}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set bondmode and\line\tab
set bondmode or\line\tab
set bondmode all\line\tab
set bondmode none\line\tab
set bondmode not bonded\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set bondmode}' {}
command controls the mechanism used to select individual bonds {}
and modifies the display of bonded and non-bonded atoms by subsequent {}
'{\uldb wireframe}{\v wireframe}' {}
commands. {}
\par\par
When using the {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb restrict}{\v restrict}' {}
commands, a given bond will be selected if i) the bondmode is {}
'{\f2\b or}' {}
and either of the connected atoms is selected, or ii) the bondmode is {}
'{\f2\b and}' {}
and both atoms connected by the bond are selected. Hence an individual {}
bond may be uniquely identified by using the command {}
'{\f2\b set bondmode and}' {}
and then uniquely selecting the atoms at both ends. {}
\par\par
The {}
'{\f2\b bondmode [all | none | not bonded]}' {}
commands add {}
'{\uldb star 75}{\v star}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb spacefill 75}{\v spacefill}' {}
markers for the designated atoms to {}
'{\uldb wireframe}{\v wireframe}' {}
displays.  Stars are used when the specified wireframe radius is zero. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setbonds}
${\footnote Set Bonds}
K{\footnote set bonds}
{\b Set Bonds}\par\par
K{\footnote bonds}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set bonds <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b bonds}' {}
parameter is used to control display of double and triple bonds as {}
multiple  lines or cylinders.  Currently bond orders are only read {}
from  MDL Mol files, Sybyl Mol2 format files, Tripos Alchemy format {}
files, CIF and mmCIF,  and suitable PDB files.  Double (and triple)  bonds {}
are specified in some  PDB files by specifying a given bond twice  (and {}
three times) in CONECT records.  The  command {}
'{\f2\b set bonds on}' {}
enables the display of bond orders, and  the command {}
'{\f2\b set bonds off}' {}
disables them. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setboundbox}
${\footnote Set BoundBox}
K{\footnote set boundbox}
{\b Set BoundBox}\par\par
K{\footnote boundbox}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set boundbox <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b boundbox}' {}
parameter controls the display of the current molecule's bounding box {}
on the display. The bounding box is orthogonal to the data file's {}
original coordinate axes. The {}
'{\f2\b set boundbox}' {}
command is similar to the commands {}
'{\uldb set axes}{\v setaxes}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb set unitcell}{\v setboundbox}' {}
that display orthogonal coordinate axes and the bounding box, {}
respectively. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setcartoon}
${\footnote Set Cartoon}
K{\footnote set cartoon}
{\b Set Cartoon}\par\par
K{\footnote bonds}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set cartoon \{<boolean>\}\line\tab
set cartoon \{<number>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b cartoon}' {}
parameter is used to control display of the cartoon version of the {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}' {}
display.  By default, the C-termini of beta-sheets are displayed as {}
arrow heads. This may be enabled and disabled using the {}
'{\f2\b set cartoons <boolean>}' {}
command. The depth of the cartoon may be adjusted using the {}
'{\f2\b cartoons <number>}' {}
command. The {}
'{\f2\b set cartoons}' {}
command without any parameters returns these two options to {}
 their default values. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setcisangle}
${\footnote Set CisAngle}
K{\footnote set cisangle}
{\b Set CisAngle}\par\par
K{\footnote cisangle}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set cisangle \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b cisangle}' {}
parameter controls the cutoff angle for identifying cis peptide {}
 bonds.  If no value is given, the cutoff is set to 90 degrees. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setdisplay}
${\footnote Set Display}
K{\footnote set display}
{\b Set Display}\par\par
K{\footnote display}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set display selected\line\tab
set display normal\par
}\pard\par
This command controls the display mode within RasMol. By default, {}
'{\f2\b set display normal}', {}
RasMol displays the molecule in the representation specified by the {}
user. The command {}
'{\f2\b set display selected}' {}
changes the display mode such that the molecule is temporarily drawn {}
so as to indicate currently selected portion of the molecule. The {}
user specified colour scheme and representation remains unchanged. {}
In this representation all selected atoms are shown in yellow and {}
all non selected atoms are shown in blue. The colour of the background {}
is also changed to a dark grey to indicate the change of display mode. {}
This command is typically only used by external Graphical User {}
Interfaces (GUIs). {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setfontsize}
${\footnote Set FontSize}
K{\footnote set fontsize}
{\b Set FontSize}\par\par
K{\footnote fontsize}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set fontsize \{<value>\} \{ FS | PS \}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set fontsize}' {}
command is used to control the size of the characters that {}
form atom labels. This value corresponds to the height of {}
the displayed character in pixels. The maximum value of {}
'{\f2\b fontsize}' {}
is 48 pixels, and the default value is 8 pixels high. {}
Fixed or proportional spacing may be selected by appending the {}
"FS" or "PS" modifiers, respectively.  The default is "FS". {}
To display atom labels on the screen use the RasMol {}
'{\uldb label}{\v label}' {}
command and to change the colour of displayed labels, use {}
the {}
'{\uldb colour labels}{\v colour}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setfontstroke}
${\footnote Set FontStroke}
K{\footnote set fontstroke}
{\b Set FontStroke}\par\par
K{\footnote fontstroke}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set fontstroke \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set fontstroke}' {}
command is used to control the size of the stroke width of the {}
characters that form atom labels.  This value is the radius in {}
pixels of cylinders used to form the strokes.  The special value {}
of "0" is the default used for the normal single pixel stroke width, {}
which allows for rapid drawing and rotation of the image. {}
Non-zero values are provided to allow for more artistic atom {}
labels for publication at the expense of extra time in rendering {}
the image. {}
\par\par
When wider strokes are used, a larger font size is recommend, e.g. {}
by using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb set fontsize 24 PS}{\v setfontsize}' {}
command, followed by {}
'{\f2\b set fontstroke 2}' {}
\par\par
To display atom labels on the screen use the RasMol {}
'{\uldb label}{\v label}' {}
command, and to change the colour of displayed labels use {}
the {}
'{\uldb colour labels}{\v colour}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote sethbonds}
${\footnote Set HBonds}
K{\footnote set hbonds}
{\b Set HBonds}\par\par
K{\footnote hbonds}
K{\footnote sidechain}
K{\footnote backbone}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set hbonds backbone\line\tab
set hbonds sidechain\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b hbonds}' {}
parameter determines whether hydrogen bonds are drawn between {}
the donor and acceptor atoms of the hydrogen bond, {}
'{\f2\b set hbonds sidechain}' {}
or between the alpha carbon atoms of the protein backbone and between {}
the phosphorous atoms of the nucleic acid backbone, {}
'{\f2\b set hbonds backbone}'. {}
The actual display of hydrogen bonds is controlled by the {}
'{\uldb hbonds}{\v hbonds}' {}
command. Drawing hydrogen bonds between protein alpha carbons or {}
nucleic acid phosphorous atoms is useful when the rest of the molecule {}
is shown in only a schematic representation such as {}
'{\uldb backbone}{\v backbone}', {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb strands}{\v strands}'. {}
This parameter is similar to the RasMol {}
'{\uldb ssbonds}{\v setssbonds}' {}
parameter. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote sethetero}
${\footnote Set Hetero}
K{\footnote set hetero}
{\b Set Hetero}\par\par
K{\footnote hetero}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set hetero <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b hetero}' {}
parameter is used to modify the 'default' behaviour of the RasMol {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
command, i.e. the behaviour of {}
'{\f2\b select}' {}
without any parameters. When this value is {}
'{\f2\b false}', {}
the default {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
region does not include any heterogeneous atoms (refer to the {}
predefined set {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v heteroset}' {}
). When this value is {}
'{\f2\b true}', {}
the default {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
region may contain hetero atoms. This parameter is similar to {}
the RasMol {}
'{\uldb hydrogen}{\v sethydrogen}' {}
parameter which determines whether hydrogen atoms should be {}
included in the default set. If both {}
'{\f2\b hetero}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb hydrogen}{\v sethydrogen}' {}
are {}
'{\f2\b true}', {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
without any parameters is equivalent to {}
'{\uldb select all}{\v select}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote sethourglass}
${\footnote Set HourGlass}
K{\footnote set hourglass}
{\b Set HourGlass}\par\par
K{\footnote hourglass}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set hourglass \{<boolean>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b hourglass}' {}
parameter allows the user to enable and disable the use of the 'hour {}
glass' cursor used by RasMol to indicate that the program is currently {}
busy drawing the next frame. The command {}
'{\f2\b set hourglass on}' {}
enables the indicator, whilst {}
'{\f2\b set hourglass off}' {}
prevents RasMol from changing the cursor. This is useful when spinning {}
the molecule, running a sequence of commands from a script file or {}
using interprocess communication to execute complex sequences of {}
commands. In these cases a 'flashing' cursor may be distracting. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote sethydrogen}
${\footnote Set Hydrogen}
K{\footnote set hydrogen}
{\b Set Hydrogen}\par\par
K{\footnote hydrogen}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set hydrogen <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b hydrogen}' {}
parameter is used to modify the "default" behaviour of the RasMol {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
command, i.e. the behaviour of {}
'{\f2\b select}' {}
without any parameters. When this value is {}
'{\f2\b false}', {}
the default {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
region does not include any hydrogen, deuterium or tritium atoms (refer {}
to the predefined set {}
'{\uldb hydrogen}{\v hydrogenset}' {}
). When this value is {}
'{\f2\b true}', {}
the default {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
region may contain hydrogen atoms. This parameter is similar to {}
the RasMol {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v sethetero}' {}
parameter which determines whether heterogeneous atoms should be {}
included in the default set. If both {}
'{\f2\b hydrogen}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v sethetero}' {}
are {}
'{\f2\b true}', {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
without any parameters is equivalent to {}
'{\uldb select all}{\v select}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setkinemage}
${\footnote Set Kinemage}
K{\footnote set kinemage}
{\b Set Kinemage}\par\par
K{\footnote mage}
K{\footnote kinemage}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set kinemage <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set kinemage}' {}
command controls the amount of detail stored in a Kinemage output {}
file generated by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb write kinemage}{\v write}' {}
command. The output kinemage files are intended to be displayed by {}
David Richardson's Mage program. {}
'{\f2\b set kinemage false}', {}
the default, only stores the currently displayed representation in {}
the generated output file. The command {}
'{\f2\b set kinemage true}', {}
generates a more complex Kinemage that contains both the wireframe {}
and backbone representations as well as the coordinate axes, {}
bounding box and crystal unit cell. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setmenus}
${\footnote Set Menus}
K{\footnote set menus}
{\b Set Menus}\par\par
K{\footnote menus}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set menus <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set menus}' {}
command enables the canvas window's menu buttons or menu bar. This {}
command is typically only used by graphical user interfaces or to {}
create as large an image as possible when using Microsoft Windows. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setmonitor}
${\footnote Set Monitor}
K{\footnote set monitor}
{\b Set Monitor}\par\par
K{\footnote menus}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set monitor <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set monitor}' {}
command enables {}
'{\uldb monitors}{\v monitor}'. {}
The distance monitor labels may be turned off with the command {}
'{\f2\b set monitor off}', {}
and re-enabled with the command {}
'{\f2\b set monitor on}'. {}
 {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setmouse}
${\footnote Set Mouse}
K{\footnote set mouse}
{\b Set Mouse}\par\par
K{\footnote mouse}
K{\footnote rasmol}
K{\footnote insight}
K{\footnote quanta}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set mouse rasmol\line\tab
set mouse insight\line\tab
set mouse quanta\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set mouse}' {}
command sets the rotation, translation, scaling and zooming mouse {}
bindings. The default value is {}
'{\f2\b rasmol}' {}
which is suitable for two button mice (for three button mice the {}
second and third buttons are synonymous); X-Y rotation is controlled {}
by the first button, and X-Y translation by the second. Additional {}
functions are controlled by holding a modifier key on the keyboard. {}
[Shift] and the first button performs scaling, [shift] and the second {}
button performs Z-rotation, and [control] and the first mouse button {}
controls the clipping plane. The {}
'{\f2\b insight}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b quanta}' {}
options provide the same mouse bindings as other packages for experienced {}
users. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setpicking}
${\footnote Set Picking}
K{\footnote set picking}
{\b Set Picking}\par\par
K{\footnote picking}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set picking <boolean>\line\tab
set picking off\line\tab
set picking none\line\tab
set picking ident\line\tab
set picking distance\line\tab
set picking monitor\line\tab
set picking angle\line\tab
set picking torsion\line\tab
set picking label\line\tab
set picking centre\line\tab
set picking center\line\tab
set picking coord\line\tab
set picking bond\line\tab
set picking atom\line\tab
set picking group\line\tab
set picking chain\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set picking}' {}
series of commands affects how a user may interact with a {}
molecule displayed on the screen in RasMol. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Enabling/Disabling Atom Identification Picking}: {}
Clicking on an atom with the mouse results in identification and {}
the display of its residue name, residue number, atom name, atom serial {}
number and chain in the command window. This behavior may be disabled {}
with the command {}
'{\f2\b set picking none}' {}
and restored with the command {}
'{\f2\b set picking ident}'. {}
The command {}
'{\f2\b set picking coord}' {}
adds the atomic coordinates of the atom to the display. {}
\par\par
Disabling picking, by using {}
'{\f2\b set picking off}' {}
is useful when executing the {}
'{\uldb pause}{\v pause}' {}
command in RasMol scripts as it prevents the display of {}
spurious message on the command line while the script is suspended. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Measuring Distances, Angles and Torsions}: {}
Interactive measurement of distances, angles and torsions {}
is achieved using the commands: {}
'{\f2\b set picking distance}', {}
'{\f2\b set picking monitor}', {}
'{\f2\b set picking angle}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b set picking torsion}', {}
respectively. In these modes, clicking on an atom results in it {}
being identified on the rasmol command line. In addition every {}
atom picked increments a modulo counter such that in distance {}
mode, every second atom displays the distance (or distance monitor) {}
between this atom and the previous one. In angle mode, every {}
third atom displays the angle between the previous three atoms {}
and in torsion mode every fourth atom displays the torsion between {}
the last four atoms. By holding down the shift key while picking an {}
atom, this modulo counter is not incremented and allows, for {}
example, the distances of consecutive atoms from a fixed atom to {}
be displayed. See the {}
'{\uldb monitor}{\v monitor}' {}
command for how to control the display of distance monitor lines and labels. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Labelling Atoms with the Mouse}: {}
The mouse may also be used to toggle the display of an atom label {}
on a given atom. The RasMol command {}
'{\f2\b set picking label}' {}
removes a label from a picked atom if it already has one or {}
displays a concise label at that atom position otherwise. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Centring Rotation with the Mouse}: {}
A molecule may be centred on a specified atom position using the {}
RasMol commands {}
'{\f2\b set picking centre}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b set picking center}'. {}
In this mode, picking an atom causes all futher rotations to be {}
about that point. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Picking a Bond as a Rotation Axis}: {}
Any bond may be picked as an axis of rotation for the portion of {}
the molecule beyond the second atom selected.  This feature should {}
be used with caution, since, naturally, it changes the conformation {}
of the molecule.  After executing {}
'{\f2\b set picking bond}' {}
or using the equivalent "Pick Bond" in the "Settings" menu, {}
a bond to be rotated is picked with the same sort of mouse clicks {}
as are used for picking atoms for a distance measurement.  Normally {}
this should be done where a bond exists, but if no bond exists, it {}
will be added.  The bond cannot be used for rotation if it is part {}
of a ring of any size.  All bonds selected for rotation are remembered {}
so that they can be properly reported when writing a script, but {}
only the most recently selected bond may be actively rotated. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Enabling Atom/Group/Chain Selection Picking}: {}
Atoms, groups and chains may be selected (as if with the {}
'{\f2\b select}' {}
command), with the {}
'{\f2\b set picking atom}', {}
'{\f2\b set picking group}', {}
'{\f2\b set picking chain}' {}
commands.  For each of these commands, the shift key may be used to {}
have a new selection added to the old, and the control key may be {}
used to have a new selection deleted from the old. When the {}
'{\f2\b set picking atom}' {}
command is given, the mouse can be used to pick or to drag a box around {}
the atoms for which selection is desired.  When the {}
'{\f2\b set picking group}' {}
command is given, picking any an atom will cause selection {}
of all atoms which agree in residue number with the picked atom, {}
even if in different chains. {}
When the {}
'{\f2\b set picking chain}' {}
command is given, picking any atom will cause selection {}
of all atoms which agree in chain identifier with the picked atom. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setplay}
${\footnote Set Play}
K{\footnote set play}
{\b Set Play}\par\par
K{\footnote play}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set play.fps \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set play.fps}' {}
command gives the number of frames per second for playback by the {}
'{\uldb play}{\v play}' {}
command (default 24 frames per second). {}
\par\par
In the current release of RasMol, the play timing is not controlled {}
by this parameter. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setradius}
${\footnote Set Radius}
K{\footnote set radius}
{\b Set Radius}\par\par
K{\footnote radius}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set radius \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set radius}' {}
command is used to alter the behaviour of the RasMol {}
'{\uldb dots}{\v dots}' {}
command depending upon the value of the {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v setsolvent}' {}
parameter. {}
When {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v setsolvent}' {}
is {}
'{\f2\b true}', {}
the {}
'{\f2\b radius}' {}
parameter controls whether a true van der Waals' surface {}
is generated by the {}
'{\uldb dots}{\v dots}' {}
command. If the value of {}
'{\f2\b radius}' {}
is anything other than zero, that value is used as the {}
radius of each atom instead of its true vdW value. When {}
the value of {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v setsolvent}' {}
is {}
'{\f2\b true}', {}
this parameter determines the 'probe sphere' (solvent) radius. {}
The parameter may be given as an integer in rasmol units or {}
containing a decimal point in Angstroms. The default value of {}
this parameter is determined by the value of {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v setsolvent}' {}
and changing {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v setsolvent}' {}
resets {}
'{\f2\b radius}' {}
to its new default value. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setrecord}
${\footnote Set Record}
K{\footnote set record}
{\b Set Record}\par\par
K{\footnote play}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set record.aps \{<value>\}\par
\tab set record.fps \{<value>\}
\tab set record.dwell \{<value>\}
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set record.aps}' {}
gives the maximum on-screen velocity in Angstroms per second in animating {}
translations, rotations and zooms (default 10 A/second).
\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set record.aps}' {}
command gives number of frames per second for recording by the {}
'{\uldb record}{\v record}' {}
command (default 24 frames per second). {}
\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set record.dwell}' {}
command sets the time in seconds to dwell on a change in appearance {}
(default .5 sec). {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setshadepower}
${\footnote Set ShadePower}
K{\footnote set shadepower}
{\b Set ShadePower}\par\par
K{\footnote shadepower}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set shadepower \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The {}
'{\f2\b shadepower}' {}
parameter (adopted from RasTop) determines the shade repartition (the contrast) {}
used in rendering solid objects. This value between 0 and 100 adjusts {}
shading on an object surface oriented along the direction to the {}
light source.  Changing the shadepower parameter does not change the {}
maximum or the minimum values of this shading, as does changing the {}
'{\uldb ambient}{\v setambient}' {}
parameter.  A value of 100 concentrates the light on the top of spheres, {}
giving a highly specular, glassy rendering (see the {}
'{\uldb specpower}{\v setspecpower}' {}
parameter). {}
A value of 0 distributes the light on the entire object. {}
\par\par
This implementation of shadepower differs from the one in RasTop {}
only in the choice of range (0 to 100 versus -20 to 20 in RasTop). {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setshadow}
${\footnote Set Shadow}
K{\footnote set shadow}
{\b Set Shadow}\par\par
K{\footnote shadow}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set shadow <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set shadow}' {}
command enables and disables ray-tracing of the currently rendered image. {}
Currently only the spacefilling representation is shadowed or can cast {}
shadows. Enabling shadowing will automatically disable the Z-clipping {}
(slabbing) plane using the command {}
'{\uldb slab off}{\v slab}'. {}
Ray-tracing typically takes about several seconds for a moderately sized protein. {}
It is recommended that shadowing be normally disabled whilst the {}
molecule is being transformed or manipulated, and only enabled once {}
an appropiate viewpoint is selected, to provide a greater impression {}
of depth. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setslabmode}
${\footnote Set SlabMode}
K{\footnote set slabmode}
{\b Set SlabMode}\par\par
K{\footnote slabmode}
K{\footnote reject}
K{\footnote half}
K{\footnote hollow}
K{\footnote solid}
K{\footnote section}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set slabmode <slabmode>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b slabmode}' {}
parameter controls the rendering method of objects cut by the {}
slabbing (z-clipping) plane. Valid slabmode parameters are {}
{\f2\b "reject"}, {\f2\b "half"}, {\f2\b "hollow"}, {}
{\f2\b "solid"} and {\f2\b "section"}. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setsolvent}
${\footnote Set Solvent}
K{\footnote set solvent}
{\b Set Solvent}\par\par
K{\footnote solvent}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set solvent <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set solvent}' {}
command is used to control the behaviour of the RasMol {}
'{\uldb dots}{\v dots}' {}
command. Depending upon the value of the {}
'{\f2\b solvent}' {}
parameter, the {}
'{\uldb dots}{\v dots}' {}
command either generates a van der Waals' or a solvent {}
accessible surface around the currently selected set of {}
atoms. Changing this parameter automatically resets the {}
value of the RasMol {}
'{\uldb radius}{\v setradius}' {}
parameter. {}
The command {}
'{\f2\b set solvent false}', {}
the default value, indicates that a van der Waals' surface {}
should be generated and resets the value of {}
'{\uldb radius}{\v setradius}' {}
to zero. The command {}
'{\f2\b set solvent true}' {}
indicates that a 'Connolly' or 'Richards' solvent {}
accessible surface should be drawn and sets the {}
'{\uldb radius}{\v setradius}' {}
parameter, the solvent radius, to 1.2 Angstroms (or 300 {}
RasMol units). {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setspecular}
${\footnote Set Specular}
K{\footnote set specular}
{\b Set Specular}\par\par
K{\footnote specular}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set specular <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set specular}' {}
command enables and disables the display of specular highlights on {}
solid objects drawn by RasMol. Specular highlights appear as white {}
reflections of the light source on the surface of the object. The {}
current RasMol implementation uses an approximation function to {}
generate this highlight. {}
\par\par
The specular highlights on the surfaces of solid objects may be {}
altered by using the specular reflection coefficient, which is {}
altered using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb set specpower}{\v setspecpower}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setspecpower}
${\footnote Set SpecPower}
K{\footnote set specpower}
{\b Set SpecPower}\par\par
K{\footnote specpower}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set specpower \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The {}
'{\f2\b specpower}' {}
parameter determines the shininess of solid objects rendered by {}
RasMol. This value between 0 and 100 adjusts the reflection {}
coefficient used in specular highlight calculations. The specular {}
highlights are enabled and disabled by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb set specular}{\v setspecular}' {}
command. Values around 20 or 30 produce plastic looking surfaces. {}
High values represent more shiny surfaces such as metals, while {}
lower values produce more diffuse/dull surfaces. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setssbonds}
${\footnote Set SSBonds}
K{\footnote set ssbonds}
{\b Set SSBonds}\par\par
K{\footnote ssbonds}
K{\footnote backbone}
K{\footnote sidechain}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set ssbonds backbone\line\tab
set ssbonds sidechain\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b ssbonds}' {}
parameter determines whether disulphide bridges are drawn between {}
the sulphur atoms in the sidechain (the default) or between the alpha {}
carbon atoms in the backbone of the cysteines residues. The actual {}
display of disulphide bridges is controlled by the {}
'{\uldb ssbonds}{\v ssbonds}' {}
command. Drawing disulphide bridges between alpha carbons is useful {}
when the rest of the protein is shown in only a schematic {}
representation such as {}
'{\uldb backbone}{\v backbone}', {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb strands}{\v strands}'. {}
This parameter is similar to the RasMol {}
'{\uldb hbonds}{\v sethbonds}' {}
parameter. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setstereo}
${\footnote Set Stereo}
K{\footnote set stereo}
{\b Set Stereo}\par\par
K{\footnote stereo}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set stereo <boolean>\line\tab
set stereo [-] <number>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b set stereo}' {}
parameter controls the separation between the left and {}
right images. Turning stereo on and off doesn't reposition {}
the centre of the molecule. {}
\par\par
Stereo viewing of a molecule may be turned on (and off) either {}
by selecting {}
'{\f2\b Stereo}' {}
from the {}
'{\f2\b Options}' {}
menu, or by typing the commands {}
'{\f2\b stereo on}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b stereo off}'. {}
\par\par
The separation angle between the two views may be adjusted with the {}
'{\f2\b set stereo [-] <number>}' {}
command, where positive values result in crossed eye viewing and {}
negative values in relaxed (wall-eyed) viewing. Currently, stereo viewing {}
is not supported in {}
'{\uldb vector PostScript}{\v setvectps}' {}
output files. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setstrands}
${\footnote Set Strands}
K{\footnote set strands}
{\b Set Strands}\par\par
K{\footnote strands}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set strands \{<value>\}\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b strands}' {}
parameter controls the number of parallel strands that are displayed {}
in the ribbon representations of proteins. The permissible values for {}
this parameter are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 9. The default value is 5. The {}
number of strands is constant for all ribbons being displayed. {}
However, the ribbon width (the separation between strands) may be {}
controlled on a residue by residue basis using the RasMol {}
'{\uldb ribbons}{\v ribbons}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote settransparent}
${\footnote Set Transparent}
K{\footnote set transparent}
{\b Set Transparent}\par\par
K{\footnote transparent}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set transparent <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b transparent}' {}
parameter controls the writing of transparent GIFs by the {}
'{\uldb write gif <filename>}{\v write}' {}
command.  This may be controlled by the {}
'{\f2\b set transparent on}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b set transparent off}' {}
commands. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setunitcell}
${\footnote Set UnitCell}
K{\footnote set unitcell}
{\b Set UnitCell}\par\par
K{\footnote unitcell}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set unitcell <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b unitcell}' {}
parameter controls the display of the crystallographic unit cell on {}
the current display. The crystal cell is only enabled if the appropriate {}
crystal symmetry information is contained in the PDB, CIF or mmCIF data {}
file. The {}
RasMol command {}
'{\uldb show symmetry}{\v show}' {}
display details of the crystal's space group and unit cell axes. The {}
'{\f2\b set unitcell}' {}
command is similar to the commands {}
'{\uldb set axes}{\v setaxes}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb set boundbox}{\v setboundbox}' {}
that display orthogonal coordinate axes and the bounding box, {}
respectively. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setvectps}
${\footnote Set VectPS}
K{\footnote set vectps}
{\b Set VectPS}\par\par
K{\footnote vectps}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set vectps <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b vectps}' {}
parameter is use to control the way in which the RasMol {}
'{\uldb write}{\v write}' {}
command generates vector PostScript output files. The command {}
'{\f2\b set vectps on}' {}
enables the use of black outlines around spheres and cylinder bonds {}
producing "cartoon-like" high resolution output. However, the current {}
implementation of RasMol incorrectly cartoons spheres that are intersected {}
by more than one other sphere. Hence "ball and stick" models are rendered {}
correctly but not large spacefilling spheres models. Cartoon outlines {}
can be disabled, the default, by the command {}
'{\f2\b set vectps off}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setwrite}
${\footnote Set Write}
K{\footnote set write}
{\b Set Write}\par\par
K{\footnote write}
\tx1200
{\f2\b Syntax:\tab
set write <boolean>\par
}\pard\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b write}' {}
parameter controls the use of the {}
'{\uldb save}{\v save}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb write}{\v write}' {}
commands within scripts, but it may only be executed from the {}
command line.  By default, this value is {}
'{\f2\b false}', {}
prohibiting the generation of files in any scripts executed at {}
start-up (such as those launched from a WWW browser). However, {}
animators may start up RasMol interactively: type {}
'{\f2\b set write on}' {}
and then execute a script to generate each frame using the {}
source command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chexprs}
${\footnote Atom Expressions}
{\fs24\b Atom Expressions}\par\par
RasMol atom expressions uniquely identify an arbitrary group of atoms {}
within a molecule. Atom expressions are composed of either primitive {}
expressions, {}
predefined sets, {}
comparison operators, {}
'{\f2\b within}' {}
expressions, {}
or logical (boolean) combinations of the above expression types. {}
\par\par
The logical operators allow complex queries to be constructed out of {}
simpler ones using the standard boolean connectives {}
'{\f2\b and}', {}
'{\f2\b or}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b not}'. {}
These may be abbreviated by the symbols {}
"{\f2\b &}", "{\f2\b |}" and "{\f2\b !}", {}
respectively. Parentheses (brackets) may be used to alter the {}
precedence of the operators. For convenience, a comma may also {}
be used for boolean disjunction. {}
\par\par
The atom expression is evaluated for each atom, hence {}
'{\f2\b protein and backbone}' {}
selects protein backbone atoms, not the protein and [nucleic] acid {}
backbone atoms! {}
\par\par
\cellx1200\cellx4500
\intbl
Examples:\cell {\f2\b backbone and not helix}\cell\row\intbl
         \cell {\f2\b within( 8.0, ser70 )}\cell\row\intbl
         \cell {\f2\b not (hydrogen or hetero)}\cell\row\intbl
         \cell {\f2\b not *.FE and hetero}\cell\row\intbl
         \cell {\f2\b 8, 12, 16, 20-28}\cell\row\intbl
         \cell {\f2\b arg, his, lys}\cell\row
\pard\par\trowd
\par\par
\tx250\li250\fi-250
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Primitive Expressions}{\v primitiveexpressions}\par
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Predefined Sets}{\v predefinedsets}\par
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Comparison Operators}{\v comparisonoperators}\par
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Within Expressions}{\v withinexpressions}\par
{\f1\'b7}\tab
{\uldb Example Expressions}{\v exampleexpressions}\par
\pard
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote exampleexpressions}
${\footnote Example Expressions}
K{\footnote example expressions}
{\b Example Expressions}\par\par
The following table gives some useful examples of RasMol {}
atom expressions. {}
\par\par
\tx1500\li1500\fi-1250
{\b Expression}
\tab{\b Interpretation}\line\par
{\f2\b *}
\tab All atoms\par
{\f2\b cys}
\tab Atoms in cysteines\par
{\f2\b hoh}
\tab Atoms in heterogeneous water molecules\par
{\f2\b as?}
\tab Atoms in either asparagine or aspartic acid\par
{\f2\b *120}
\tab Atoms at residue 120 of all chains\par
{\f2\b *p}
\tab Atoms in chain P\par
{\f2\b *.n?}
\tab Nitrogen atoms\par
{\f2\b cys.sg}
\tab Sulphur atoms in cysteine residues\par
{\f2\b ser70.c?}
\tab Carbon atoms in serine-70\par
{\f2\b hem*p.fe}
\tab Iron atoms in the Heme groups of chain P\par
{\f2\b *.*;A}
\tab All atoms in alternate conformation A\par
{\f2\b */4}
\tab All atoms in model 4\par
\par\pard
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote primitiveexpressions}
${\footnote Primitive Expressions}
K{\footnote primitive expressions}
{\b Primitive Expressions}\par\par
RasMol primitive expressions are the fundamental building blocks {}
of atom expressions. There are two types of primitive expression. {}
The first type is used to identify a given residue number or range {}
of residue numbers. A single residue is identified by its number {}
(position in the sequence), and a range is specified by lower and {}
upper bounds separated by a hyphen character. For example {}
'{\f2\b select 5,6,7,8}' {}
is also {}
'{\f2\b select 5-8}'. {}
Note that this selects the given residue numbers in all macromolecule {}
chains. {}
\par\par
The second type of primitive expression specifies a sequence of fields {}
that must match for a given atom. The first part specifies a residue {}
(or group of residues) and an optional second part specifies the atoms {}
within those residues. The first part consists of a residue name, {}
optionally followed by a residue number and/or chain identifier. {}
\par\par
A residue name typically consists of up to three alphabetic characters, {}
which are case insensitive. Hence the primitive expressions {}
'{\f2\b SER}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b ser}' {}
are equivalent, identifying all serine residues. {}
Residue names that contain non-alphabetic characters, such as {}
sulphate groups, may be delimited using square brackets, i.e. {}
'{\f2\b [SO4]}'. {}
\par\par
The residue number is intended to be the residue's position in {}
the macromolecule sequence, but negative sequence numbers, gaps {}
in numbering, or even reverse numbering are permitted in the PDB format. {}
Care must be taken when specifying both residue name and number. {}
If the group at the specified position isn't the specified residue {}
then no atoms are selected. {}
\par\par
The chain identifier is typically a single case-insensitive {}
alphabetic or numeric character. Numeric chain identifiers must {}
be distinguished or separated from residue numbers by a colon {}
character. For example, {}
'{\f2\b SER70A}' {}
for the alphabetic chain identifier, "A", or {}
'{\f2\b SER70:1}' {}
for the numeric chain identifier, "1". {}
\par\par
The second part consists of a period character followed by an atom {}
name.  An atom name may be up to four alphabetic or numeric characters. {}
An optional semicolon followed by an alternate conformation {}
identifier may be appended.  An optional slash followed by a {}
model number may also be appended. {}
\par\par
An atom name may be up to four alphabetic or numeric characters. {}
\par\par
An asterisk may be used as a wild card for a whole field and a {}
question mark as a single character wildcard. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote comparisonoperators}
${\footnote Comparison Operators}
K{\footnote comparison operators}
{\b Comparison Operators}\par\par
Parts of a molecule may also be distinguished using equality, {}
inequality and ordering operators on their properties. The format {}
of such comparison expression is a property name, followed by a {}
comparison operator and then an integer value. {}
\par\par
The atom properties that may be used in RasMol are {}
'{\f2\b atomno}' {}
for the atom serial number, {}
'{\f2\b elemno}' {}
for the atom's atomic number (element), {}
'{\f2\b resno}' {}
for the residue number, {}
'{\f2\b radius}' {}
for the spacefill radius in RasMol units (or zero if not represented {}
as a sphere) and {}
'{\f2\b temperature}' {}
for the PDB isotropic temperature value. {}
\par\par
The equality operator is denoted either {}
"{\f2\b =}" or "{\f2\b ==}". {}
The inequality operator as either {}
"{\f2\b <>}", "{\f2\b !=}" or "{\f2\b /=}". {}
The ordering operators are {}
"{\f2\b <}" {}
for less than, {}
"{\f2\b <=}" {}
for less than or equal to, {}
"{\f2\b >}" {}
for greater than, and {}
"{\f2\b >=}" {}
for greater than or equal to. {}
\par\par
\tx1500
{\f2\b Examples:
\tab resno < 23\par
\tab temperature >= 900\par
\tab atomno == 487\par
}\pard\par
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote withinexpressions}
${\footnote Within Expressions}
K{\footnote within expressions}
{\b Within Expressions}\par\par
K{\footnote within}
A RasMol {}
'{\f2\b within}' {}
expression allows atoms to be selected on their proximity to {}
another set of atoms. A {}
'{\f2\b within}' {}
expression takes two parameters separated by a comma and surrounded {}
by parentheses. The first argument is an integer value called the {}
"cut-off" distance of the within expression and the second argument {}
is any  valid atom expression. The cut-off distance is expressed in {}
either integer RasMol units or Angstroms containing a decimal point. {}
An atom is selected if it is within the cut-off distance of any of {}
the atoms defined by the second argument. This allows complex {}
expressions to be constructed containing nested {}
'{\f2\b within}' {}
expressions. {}
\par\par
For example, the command {}
'{\f2\b select within(3.2,backbone)}' {}
selects any atom within a 3.2 Angstrom radius of any atom in a {}
protein or nucleic acid backbone. {}
'{\f2\b Within}' {}
expressions are particularly useful for selecting the atoms {}
around an active site. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote predefinedsets}
${\footnote Predefined Sets}
K{\footnote predefined sets}
{\b Predefined Sets}\par\par
K{\footnote sets}
RasMol atom expressions may contain predefined sets. These sets {}
are single keywords that represent portions of a molecule of interest. {}
Predefined sets are often abbreviations of primitive atom expressions. {}
In some cases the use of predefined sets allows selection of areas of {}
a molecule that could not otherwise be distinguished. {}
A list of the currently predefined sets {}
is given below. {}
In addition to the sets listed here, RasMol also treats element names {}
(and their plurals) as predefined sets containing all atoms of that {}
element type, i.e. the command {}
'{\uldb select oxygen}{\v select}' {}
is equivalent to the command {}
'{\uldb select elemno=8}{\v select}'. {}
\par\par
\cellx1200\cellx2400\cellx3600\cellx4800
\intbl
{\uldb at}{\v atset}\cell
{\uldb acidic}{\v acidicset}\cell
{\uldb acyclic}{\v acyclicset}\cell
{\uldb aliphatic}{\v aliphaticset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb alpha}{\v alphaset}\cell
{\uldb amino}{\v aminoset}\cell
{\uldb aromatic}{\v aromaticset}\cell
{\uldb backbone}{\v backboneset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb basic}{\v basicset}\cell
{\uldb bonded}{\v bondedset}\cell
{\uldb buried}{\v buriedset}\cell
{\uldb cg}{\v cgset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb charged}{\v chargedset}\cell
{\uldb cyclic}{\v cyclicset}\cell
{\uldb cystine}{\v cystineset}\cell
{\uldb helix}{\v helixset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb hetero}{\v heteroset}\cell
{\uldb hydrogen}{\v hydrogenset}\cell
{\uldb hydrophobic}{\v hydrophobicset}\cell
{\uldb ions}{\v ionsset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb large}{\v largeset}\cell
{\uldb ligand}{\v ligandset}\cell
{\uldb medium}{\v mediumset}\cell
{\uldb neutral}{\v neutralset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb nucleic}{\v nucleicset}\cell
{\uldb polar}{\v polarset}\cell
{\uldb protein}{\v proteinset}\cell
{\uldb purine}{\v purineset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb pyrimidine}{\v pyrimidineset}\cell
{\uldb selected}{\v selectedset}\cell
{\uldb sheet}{\v sheetset}\cell
{\uldb sidechain}{\v sidechainset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb small}{\v smallset}\cell
{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}\cell
{\uldb surface}{\v surfaceset}\cell
{\uldb turn}{\v turnset}\cell
\row\intbl
{\uldb water}{\v waterset}\cell \cell \cell \cell
\row\pard\par\trowd
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote atset}
${\footnote AT Set}
K{\footnote at set}
{\b AT Set}\par\par
K{\footnote at}
This set contains the atoms in the complementary nucleotides {}
adenosine and thymidine (A and T, respectively). All nucleotides {}
are classified as either the set {}
'{\f2\b at}' {}
or the set {}
'{\uldb cg}{\v cgset}' {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b a,t}", {}
and {}
"{\f2\b nucleic and not cg}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote acidicset}
${\footnote Acidic Set}
K{\footnote acidic set}
{\b Acidic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote acidic}
The set of acidic amino acids. {}
These are the residue types Asp and Glu. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\f2\b acidic}', {}
'{\uldb basic}{\v basicset}' {}
'{\f2\b or}' {}
'{\uldb neutral}{\v neutralset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b asp, glu}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b amino and not (basic or neutral)}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote acyclicset}
${\footnote Acyclic Set}
K{\footnote acyclic set}
{\b Acyclic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote acyclic}
The set of atoms in amino acids not containing a cycle or {}
ring. All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\uldb cyclic}{\v cyclicset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b acyclic}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not cyclic}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote aliphaticset}
${\footnote Aliphatic Set}
K{\footnote aliphatic set}
{\b Aliphatic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote aliphatic}
This set contains the aliphatic amino acids. {}
These are the amino acids Ala, Gly, Ile, Leu and Val. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b ala, gly, ile, leu, val}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote alphaset}
${\footnote Alpha Set}
K{\footnote alpha set}
{\b Alpha Set}\par\par
K{\footnote alpha}
The set of alpha carbons in the protein molecule. This set is {}
approximately equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b *.CA}". {}
This command should not be confused with the predefined set {}
'{\uldb helix}{\v helixset}' {}
which contains the atoms in the amino acids of the protein's {}
alpha helices. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote aminoset}
${\footnote Amino Set}
K{\footnote amino set}
{\b Amino Set}\par\par
K{\footnote amino}
This set contains all the atoms contained in amino acid residues. {}
This is useful for distinguishing the protein from the nucleic {}
acid and heterogeneous atoms in the current molecule database. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote aromaticset}
${\footnote Aromatic Set}
K{\footnote aromatic set}
{\b Aromatic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote aromatic}
The set of atoms in amino acids containing aromatic rings. {}
These are the amino acids His, Phe, Trp and Tyr. {}
Because they contain aromatic rings all members of this {}
set are member of the predefined set {}
'{\uldb cyclic}{\v cyclicset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b his, phe, trp, tyr}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b cyclic and not pro}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote backboneset}
${\footnote Backbone Set}
K{\footnote backbone set}
{\b Backbone Set}\par\par
K{\footnote backbone}
K{\footnote mainchain}
This set contains the four atoms of each amino acid that form the {}
polypeptide N-C-C-O backbone of proteins, and the atoms of the sugar {}
phosphate backbone of nucleic acids. {}
Use the RasMol predefined sets {}
'{\f2\b protein}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b nucleic}' {}
to distinguish between the two forms of backbone. {}
Atoms in nucleic acids and proteins are either {}
'{\f2\b backbone}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb sidechain}{\v sidechainset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol expression {}
"{\f2\b (protein or nucleic) and not sidechain}". {}
\par\par
The predefined set {}
'{\f2\b mainchain}' {}
is synonymous with the set {}
'{\f2\b backbone}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote basicset}
${\footnote Basic Set}
K{\footnote basic set}
{\b Basic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote basic}
The set of basic amino acids. {}
These are the residue types Arg, His and Lys. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\uldb acidic}{\v acidicset}', {}
'{\f2\b basic}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb neutral}{\v neutralset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b arg, his, lys}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b amino and not (acidic or neutral)}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote bondedset}
${\footnote Bonded Set}
K{\footnote bonded set}
{\b Bonded Set}\par\par
K{\footnote bonded}
This set contain all the atoms in the current molecule database that {}
are bonded to at least one other atom. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote buriedset}
${\footnote Buried Set}
K{\footnote buried set}
{\b Buried Set}\par\par
K{\footnote buried}
This set contains the atoms in those amino acids that tend {}
(prefer) to be buried inside protein, away from contact with {}
solvent molecules. This set refers to the amino acids {}
preference and not the actual solvent accessibility for {}
the current protein. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\uldb surface}{\v surfaceset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b buried}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not surface}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cgset}
${\footnote CG Set}
K{\footnote cg set}
{\b CG Set}\par\par
K{\footnote cg}
This set contains the atoms in the complementary nucleotides {}
cytidine and guanosine (C and G, respectively). All nucleotides {}
are classified as either the set {}
'{\uldb at}{\v atset}' {}
or the set {}
'{\f2\b cg}' {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b c,g}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b nucleic and not at}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chargedset}
${\footnote Charged Set}
K{\footnote charged set}
{\b Charged Set}\par\par
K{\footnote charged}
This set contains the charged amino acids. These are the amino {}
acids that are either {}
'{\uldb acidic}{\v acidicset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb basic}{\v basicset}'. {}
Amino acids are classified as being either {}
'{\f2\b charged}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb neutral}{\v neutralset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b acidic or basic}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b amino and not neutral}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cyclicset}
${\footnote Cyclic Set}
K{\footnote cyclic set}
{\b Cyclic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote cyclic}
The set of atoms in amino acids containing a cycle or rings. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\f2\b cyclic}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb acyclic}{\v acyclicset}'. {}
This set consists of the amino acids His, Phe, Pro, Trp and Tyr. {}
The members of the predefined set {}
'{\uldb aromatic}{\v aromaticset}' {}
are members of this set. {}
The only cyclic but non-aromatic amino acid is proline. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b his, phe, pro, trp, tyr}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b aromatic or pro}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b amino and not acyclic}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cystineset}
${\footnote Cystine Set}
K{\footnote cystine set}
{\b Cystine Set}\par\par
K{\footnote cystine}
This set contains the atoms of cysteine residues that form part {}
of a disulphide bridge, i.e. half cystines. RasMol automatically {}
determines disulphide bridges, if neither the predefined set {}
'{\f2\b cystine}' {}
nor the RasMol {}
'{\uldb ssbonds}{\v ssbonds}' {}
command have been used since the molecule was loaded. The set of {}
free cysteines may be determined using the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b cys and not cystine}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote helixset}
${\footnote Helix Set}
K{\footnote helix set}
{\b Helix Set}\par\par
K{\footnote helix}
This set contains all atoms that form part of a protein alpha {}
helix as determined by either the PDB file author or Kabsch and {}
Sander's DSSP algorithm. By default, RasMol uses the secondary {}
structure determination given in the PDB file if it exists. {}
Otherwise, it uses the DSSP algorithm as used by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structure}' {}
command. {}
\par\par
This predefined set should not be confused with the predefined set {}
'{\uldb alpha}{\v alphaset}' {}
which contains the alpha carbon atoms of a protein. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote heteroset}
${\footnote Hetero Set}
K{\footnote hetero set}
{\b Hetero Set}\par\par
K{\footnote hetero}
This set contains all the heterogeneous atoms in the molecule. These {}
are the atoms described by HETATM entries in the PDB file. These {}
typically contain water, cofactors and other solvents and ligands. All {}
'{\f2\b hetero}' {}
atoms are classified as either {}
'{\uldb ligand}{\v ligandset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}' {}
atoms. These heterogeneous {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}' {}
atoms are further classified as either {}
'{\uldb water}{\v waterset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb ions}{\v ionsset}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote hydrogenset}
${\footnote Hydrogen Set}
K{\footnote hydrogen set}
{\b Hydrogen Set}\par\par
K{\footnote hydrogen}
This predefined set contains all the hydrogen, deuterium and tritium atoms {}
of the current molecule. This predefined set is equivalent to the {}
RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b elemno=1}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote hydrophobicset}
${\footnote Hydrophobic Set}
K{\footnote hydrophobic set}
{\b Hydrophobic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote hydrophobic}
This set contains all the hydrophobic amino acids. {}
These are the amino acids Ala, Leu, Val, Ile, Pro, Phe, Met and Trp. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\f2\b hydrophobic}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb polar}{\v polarset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b ala, leu, val, ile, pro, phe, met, trp}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b amino and not polar}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote ionsset}
${\footnote Ions Set}
K{\footnote ions set}
{\b Ions Set}\par\par
K{\footnote ions}
This set contains all the heterogeneous phosphate and sulphate ions in {}
the current molecule data file. A large number of these ions are {}
sometimes associated with protein and nucleic acid structures determined {}
by X-ray crystallography. These atoms tend to clutter an image. All {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v heteroset}' {}
atoms are classified as either {}
'{\uldb ligand}{\v ligandset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}' {}
atoms. All {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}' {}
atoms are classified as either {}
'{\uldb water}{\v waterset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b ions}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote largeset}
${\footnote Large Set}
K{\footnote large set}
{\b Large Set}\par\par
K{\footnote large}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\uldb small}{\v smallset}', {}
'{\uldb medium}{\v mediumset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b large}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not (small or medium)}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote ligandset}
${\footnote Ligand Set}
K{\footnote ligand set}
{\b Ligand Set}\par\par
K{\footnote ligand}
This set contains all the heterogeneous cofactor and ligand moieties that {}
are contained in the current molecule data file.  This set is defined {}
to be all {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v heteroset}' {}
atoms that are not {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}' {}
atoms. Hence this set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b hetero and not solvent}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote mediumset}
${\footnote Medium Set}
K{\footnote medium set}
{\b Medium Set}\par\par
K{\footnote medium}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\uldb small}{\v smallset}', {}
'{\f2\b medium}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb large}{\v largeset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not (large or small)}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote neutralset}
${\footnote Neutral Set}
K{\footnote neutral set}
{\b Neutral Set}\par\par
K{\footnote neutral}
The set of neutral amino acids. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\uldb acidic}{\v acidicset}', {}
'{\uldb basic}{\v basicset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b neutral}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not (acidic or basic)}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote nucleicset}
${\footnote Nucleic Set}
K{\footnote nucleic set}
{\b Nucleic Set}\par\par
K{\footnote nucleic}
The set of all atoms in nucleic acids, which consists of the four {}
nucleotide bases adenosine, cytidine, guanosine and thymidine (A, {}
C, G and T, respectively). All neucleotides are classified as either {}
'{\uldb purine}{\v purineset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb pyrimidine}{\v pyrimidineset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b a,c,g,t}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b purine or pyrimidine}". {}
The symbols for RNA nucleotides (U, +U, I, 1MA, 5MC, OMC, {}
1MG, 2MG, M2G, 7MG, OMG, YG, H2U, 5MU, and PSU) are also {}
recognized as members of this set. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote polarset}
${\footnote Polar Set}
K{\footnote polar set}
{\b Polar Set}\par\par
K{\footnote polar}
This set contains the polar amino acids. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\uldb hydrophobic}{\v hydrophobicset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b polar}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not hydrophobic}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote proteinset}
${\footnote Protein Set}
K{\footnote protein set}
{\b Protein Set}\par\par
K{\footnote protein}
The set of all atoms in proteins. This consists of the RasMol {}
predefined set {}
'{\uldb amino}{\v aminoset}' {}
and common post-translation modifications. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote purineset}
${\footnote Purine Set}
K{\footnote purine set}
{\b Purine Set}\par\par
K{\footnote purine}
The set of purine nucleotides. {}
These are the bases adenosine and guanosine (A and G, respectively). {}
All nucleotides are either {}
'{\f2\b purines}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb pyrimidines}{\v pyrimidineset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b a,g}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b nucleic and not pyrimidine}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote pyrimidineset}
${\footnote Pyrimidine Set}
K{\footnote pyrimidine set}
{\b Pyrimidine Set}\par\par
K{\footnote pyrimidine}
The set of pyrimidine nucleotides. {}
These are the bases cytidine and thymidine (C and T, respectively). {}
All nucleotides are either {}
'{\uldb purines}{\v purineset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b pyrimidines}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b c,t}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b nucleic and not purine}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote selectedset}
${\footnote Selected Set}
K{\footnote selected set}
{\b Selected Set}\par\par
K{\footnote selected}
This set contains the set of atoms in the currently selected {}
region. The currently selected region is defined by the preceding {}
'{\uldb select}{\v select}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb restrict}{\v restrict}' {}
command and not the atom expression containing the {}
'{\f2\b selected}' {}
keyword. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote sheetset}
${\footnote Sheet Set}
K{\footnote sheet set}
{\b Sheet Set}\par\par
K{\footnote sheet}
This set contains all atoms that form part of a protein beta {}
sheet as determined by either the PDB file author or Kabsch and {}
Sander's DSSP algorithm. By default, RasMol uses the secondary {}
structure determination given in the PDB file if it exists. {}
Otherwise, it uses the DSSP algorithm as used by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structure}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote sidechainset}
${\footnote Sidechain Set}
K{\footnote sidechain set}
{\b Sidechain Set}\par\par
K{\footnote sidechain}
This set contains the functional sidechains of any amino acids {}
and the base of each nucleotide. These are the atoms not part of {}
the polypeptide N-C-C-O backbone of proteins or the sugar {}
phosphate backbone of nucleic acids. {}
Use the RasMol predefined sets {}
'{\f2\b protein}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b nucleic}' {}
to distinguish between the two forms of sidechain. {}
Atoms in nucleic acids and proteins are either {}
'{\uldb backbone}{\v backboneset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b sidechain}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol expression {}
"{\f2\b (protein or nucleic) and not backbone}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote smallset}
${\footnote Small Set}
K{\footnote small set}
{\b Small Set}\par\par
K{\footnote small}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\f2\b small}', {}
'{\uldb medium}{\v mediumset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb large}{\v largeset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not (medium or large)}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote solventset}
${\footnote Solvent Set}
K{\footnote solvent set}
{\b Solvent Set}\par\par
K{\footnote solvent}
This set contains the solvent atoms in the molecule coordinate file. {}
These are the heterogeneous water molecules, phosphate and sulphate {}
ions. All {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v heteroset}' {}
atoms are classified as either {}
'{\uldb ligand}{\v ligandset}' {}
or {}
'{\f2\b solvent}' {}
atoms. All {}
'{\f2\b solvent}' {}
atoms are classified as either {}
'{\uldb water}{\v waterset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb ions}{\v ionsset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expressions {}
"{\f2\b hetero and not ligand}" {}
and {}
"{\f2\b water or ions}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote surfaceset}
${\footnote Surface Set}
K{\footnote surface set}
{\b Surface Set}\par\par
K{\footnote surface}
This set contains the atoms in those amino acids that tend {}
(prefer) to be on the surface of proteins, in contact with {}
solvent molecules. This set refers to the amino acids {}
preference and not the actual solvent accessibility for {}
the current protein. {}
All amino acids are classified as either {}
'{\f2\b surface}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb buried}{\v buriedset}'. {}
This set is equivalent to the RasMol atom expression {}
"{\f2\b amino and not buried}". {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote turnset}
${\footnote Turn Set}
K{\footnote turn set}
{\b Turn Set}\par\par
K{\footnote turn}
This set contains all atoms that form part of a protein turns {}
as determined by either the PDB file author or Kabsch and {}
Sander's DSSP algorithm. By default, RasMol uses the secondary {}
structure determination given in the PDB file if it exists. {}
Otherwise, it uses the DSSP algorithm as used by the RasMol {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structure}' {}
command. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote waterset}
${\footnote Water Set}
K{\footnote water set}
{\b Water Set}\par\par
K{\footnote water}
This set contains all the heterogeneous water molecules in the current {}
database. A large number of water molecules are sometimes associated {}
with protein and nucleic acid structures determined by X-ray {}
crystallography. These atoms tend to clutter an image. {}
All {}
'{\uldb hetero}{\v heteroset}' {}
atoms are classified as either {}
'{\uldb ligand}{\v ligandset}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}' {}
atoms. The {}
'{\uldb solvent}{\v solventset}' {}
atoms are further classified as either {}
'{\f2\b water}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb ions}{\v ionsset}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote setsummary}
${\footnote Set Summary}
K{\footnote set summary}
{\b Set Summary}\par\par
K{\footnote summary}
The table below summarises RasMol's classification of the common amino acids. {}
\par\par
{\trowd \trgaph36\trleft-36 \cellx1116\cellx1490
\cellx1864\cellx2238\cellx2612\cellx2986\cellx3360\cellx3734\cellx4108\cellx4482\cellx4856\cellx5230\cellx5604\cellx5978\cellx6352\cellx6726\cellx7100\cellx7474\cellx7848\cellx8222\cellx8596\pard\plain
\qc\keep\keepn\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs20 Predefined\cell }\pard \qc\keep\keepn\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs12 ALA\cell ARG\cell ASN\cell ASP\cell CYS\cell GLU\cell GLN\cell GLY\cell HIS\cell }\pard \qc\keep\keepn\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs12 ILE\cell }\pard \qc\keep\keepn\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs12 LEU\cell LYS\cell MET\cell PHE\cell PRO\cell SER\cell THR\cell TRP\cell TYR\cell }\pard
\qc\keep\keepn\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs12 VAL\cell }\pard \intbl {\f20\fs12 \row }\trowd
\trgaph36\trleft-36 \cellx1116\cellx1490\cellx1864\cellx2238\cellx2612\cellx2986\cellx3360\cellx3734\cellx4108\cellx4482\cellx4856\cellx5230\cellx5604\cellx5978\cellx6352\cellx6726\cellx7100\cellx7474\cellx7848\cellx8222
\cellx8596\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 set\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f0 A\cell R\cell N\cell D\cell C\cell E\cell Q\cell G\cell H\cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f0 I\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f0 L\cell K\cell M\cell F\cell P\cell S\cell T\cell W\cell Y\cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f0 V\cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f0 \row }\trowd \trgaph36\trleft-36 \cellx1116\cellx1490
\cellx1864\cellx2238\cellx2612\cellx2986
\cellx3360\cellx3734\cellx4108\cellx4482
\cellx4856\cellx5230\cellx5604
\cellx5978\cellx6352\cellx6726\cellx7100
\cellx7474\cellx7848\cellx8222\cellx8596\pard
\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 acidic\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\trowd \trgaph36\trleft-36 \cellx1116
\cellx1490\cellx1864\cellx2238\cellx2612\cellx2986\cellx3360\cellx3734\cellx4108\cellx4482\cellx4856\cellx5230\cellx5604\cellx5978\cellx6352\cellx6726\cellx7100\cellx7474\cellx7848\cellx8222\cellx8596\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs20 acyclic\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell
{\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell
{\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 aliphatic\cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row
}\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 aromatic\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 basic\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {
\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7}
\cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 buried\cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \intbl
{\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 charged\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7}
\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 cyclic\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {
\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell
{\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20
hydrophobic\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell
}\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20
{\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 large\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell
{\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell
\cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 medium\cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20
\row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 negative\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 neutral\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {
\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {
\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 polar\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell
{\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell
\cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\f0\fs20 positive\cell
}\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl {\b\f22\fs20 \row }\pard
\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs20 small\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl {\b\f2\fs20 {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell \cell \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell \cell }\pard
\qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\b\f22\fs20 \row }\trowd \trgaph36\trleft-36 \cellx1116
\cellx1490\cellx1864\cellx2238\cellx2612\cellx2986\cellx3360\cellx3734\cellx4108\cellx4482\cellx4856\cellx5230\cellx5604\cellx5978\cellx6352\cellx6726\cellx7100\cellx7474\cellx7848\cellx8222\cellx8596\pard \tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\f0\fs20 surface\cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell \cell {\f1\'b7} \cell }\pard \qc\tx1080\tx2700\tx4320\tx5940\tx7560\tx8640\intbl
{\b\f2\fs20 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\b\f22\fs20 \row\pard\par\trowd }
\par\page\par}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chcolours}
${\footnote Colour Schemes}
{\fs24\b Colour Schemes}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\uldb colour}{\v colour}' {}
command allows different objects (such as atoms, bonds and ribbon segments) {}
to be given a specified colour. Typically this colour is either a RasMol {}
predefined colour name or an RGB triple. Additionally RasMol also supports {}
'{\uldb alt}{\v altcolours}', {}
'{\uldb amino}{\v aminocolours}', {}
'{\uldb chain}{\v chaincolours}', {}
'{\uldb charge}{\v chargecolours}', {}
'{\uldb cpk}{\v cpkcolours}', {}
'{\uldb group}{\v groupcolours}', {}
'{\uldb model}{\v nmrmodelcolours}', {}
'{\uldb shapely}{\v shapelycolours}', {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structurecolours}', {}
'{\uldb temperature}{\v temperaturecolours}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb user}{\v usercolours}' {}
colour schemes for atoms, and {}
'{\uldb hbond type}{\v hbondtypecolours}' {}
colour scheme for hydrogen bonds and {}
'{\uldb electrostatic potential}{\v potentialcolours}' {}
colour scheme for dot surfaces. {}
The 24 currently predefined colour {}
names are {}
listed below with their corresponding RGB triplet. {}
\par\par
{\cellx1200\cellx3200
\intbl
Black\cell [0,0,0]\cell\row\intbl
Orange\cell [255,165,0]\cell\row\intbl
Blue\cell [0,0,255]\cell\row\intbl
Pink\cell [255,101,117]\cell\row\intbl
BlueTint\cell [175,214,255]\cell \row\intbl
PinkTint\cell [255,171,187]\cell\row\intbl
Brown\cell [175,117,89]\cell\row\intbl
Purple\cell [160,32,240]\cell\row\intbl
Cyan\cell [0,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
Red\cell [255,0,0]\cell\row\intbl
Gold\cell [255,156,0]\cell\row\intbl
RedOrange\cell [255,69,0]\cell\row\intbl
Grey\cell [125,125,125]\cell\row\intbl
SeaGreen\cell [0,250,109]\cell\row\intbl
Green\cell [0,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
SkyBlue\cell [58,144,255]\cell\row\intbl
GreenBlue\cell [46,139,87]\cell\row\intbl
Violet\cell [238,130,238]\cell\row\intbl
GreenTint\cell [152,255,179]\cell\row\intbl
White\cell [255,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
HotPink\cell [255,0,101]\cell\row\intbl
Yellow\cell [255,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
Magenta\cell [255,0,255]\cell\row\intbl
YellowTint\cell [246,246,117]\cell\row\pard\par\trowd}
\par\par
If you frequently wish to use a colour not predefined, you can write {}
a one-line script. For example, if you make the file {}
'{\f2\b grey.col}' {}
containing the line, {}
'{\uldb colour [180,180,180] #grey}{\v colour}', {}
then the command {}
'{\uldb script grey.col}{\v script}' {}
colours the currently selected atom set grey. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote altcolours}
${\footnote Alt Colours}
K{\footnote alt colours}
{\b Alt Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b alt}' {}
(Alternate Conformer) {}
colour scheme codes the base {}
structure with one colour and applies a limited number of colours to each {}
alternate conformer.  In a RasMol built for 8-bit colour systems, 4 colours {}
are allowed for alternate conformers. Otherwise, 8 colours are available. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote aminocolours}
${\footnote Amino Colours}
K{\footnote amino colours}
{\b Amino Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b amino}' {}
colour scheme colours amino acids according to traditional amino acid {}
properties. The purpose of colouring is to identify amino acids in an {}
unusual or surprising environment. The outer parts of a protein that are {}
polar are visible (bright) colours and non-polar residues darker. Most {}
colours are hallowed by tradition. This colour scheme is similar to the {}
'{\uldb shapely}{\v shapelycolours}' {}
scheme. {}
\par\par
{\cellx1800\cellx3500\cellx5500
\intbl
ASP, GLU\cell Bright Red\cell [230,10,10]\cell\row\intbl
LYS, ARG\cell Blue\cell [20,90,255]\cell\row\intbl
CYS, MET\cell Yellow\cell [230,230,0]\cell\row\intbl
SER, THR\cell Orange\cell [250,150,0]\cell\row\intbl
PHE, TYR\cell Mid Blue\cell [50,50,170]\cell\row\intbl
ASN, GLN\cell Cyan\cell [230,230,0]\cell\row\intbl
GLY\cell Light Grey\cell [235,235,235]\cell\row\intbl
LEU, VAL, ILE\cell Green\cell [15,130,15]\cell\row\intbl
ALA\cell Dark Grey\cell [200,200,200]\cell\row\intbl
TRP\cell Purple\cell [180,90,180]\cell\row\intbl
HIS\cell Pale Blue\cell [130,130,210]\cell\row\intbl
PRO\cell Flesh\cell [220,150,130]\cell\row\intbl
Others\cell Tan\cell [190,160,110]\cell
\row\pard\par\trowd}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chaincolours}
${\footnote Chain Colours}
K{\footnote chain colours}
{\b Chain Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b chain}' {}
colour scheme assigns each macromolecular chain a unique colour. This {}
colour scheme is particularly useful for distinguishing the parts of {}
multimeric structure or the individual 'strands' of a DNA chain. {}
'{\f2\b Chain}' {}
can be selected from the RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Colours}' {}
menu. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chargecolours}
${\footnote Charge Colours}
K{\footnote charge colours}
{\b Charge Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b charge}' {}
colour scheme colour codes each atom according to the charge value {}
stored in the input file (or beta factor field of PDB files). High {}
values are coloured in blue (positive) and lower values coloured in {}
red (negative). Rather than use a fixed scale this scheme determines {}
the maximum and minimum values of the charge/temperature field and {}
interpolates from red to blue appropriately. Hence, green cannot be {}
assumed to be 'no net charge' charge. {}
\par\par
The difference between the {}
'{\uldb charge}{\v chargecolours}' {}
and {}
'{\f2\b temperature}' {}
colour schemes is that increasing temperature values proceed from blue {}
to red, whereas increasing charge values go from red to blue. {}
\par\par
If the charge/temperature field stores reasonable values it is possible {}
to use the RasMol {}
'{\uldb colour dots potential}{\v potentialcolours}' {}
command to colour code a dot surface (generated by the {}
'{\uldb dots}{\v dots}' {}
command) by electrostatic potential. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cpkcolours}
${\footnote CPK Colours}
K{\footnote cpk colours}
{\b CPK Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b cpk}' {}
colour scheme is based upon the colours of the popular plastic {}
spacefilling models which were developed by Corey, Pauling and later {}
improved by Kultun. This colour scheme colours 'atom' objects by the {}
atom (element) type. This is the scheme conventionally used by chemists. {}
The assignment of the most commonly used element types to colours is {}
given below. {}
\par\par
The assignment of element type to colours is given below. {}
\par\par
\cellx2000\cellx4000\cellx6500
\intbl
Carbon\cell light grey\cell [200,200,200]\cell\row\intbl
Oxygen\cell red\cell [240,0,0]\cell\row\intbl
Hydrogen\cell white\cell [255,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
Nitrogen\cell sky blue\cell [143,143,255]\cell\row\intbl
Sulphur\cell yellow\cell [255,200,50]\cell\row\intbl
Phosphorous\cell orange\cell [255,165,0]\cell\row\intbl
Chlorine\cell green\cell [0,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
Bromine, Zinc\cell brown\cell [165,42,42]\cell\row\intbl
Sodium\cell blue\cell [0,0,255]\cell\row\intbl
Iron\cell orange\cell [255,165,0]\cell\row\intbl
Magnesium\cell forest green\cell [34,139,34]\cell\row\intbl
Calcium \cell dark grey\cell [128,128,144]\cell\row\intbl
unknown\cell deep pink\cell [255,20,147]\cell\row\pard\par
\trowd
\par\par
The assignment of element type to colours for the cpknew colour scheme is given below. {}
\par\par
\cellx2000\cellx4000\cellx6500
\intbl
Carbon\cell light grey\cell [211,211,211]\cell\row\intbl
Oxygen\cell red\cell [255,0,0]\cell\row\intbl
Hydrogen\cell white\cell [255,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
Nitrogen\cell sky blue\cell [135,206,235]\cell\row\intbl
Sulphur\cell yellow\cell [255,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
Phosphorous\cell orange\cell [255,170,0]\cell\row\intbl
Chlorine\cell green\cell [0,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
Bromine, Zinc\cell brown\cell [128,40,40]\cell\row\intbl
Sodium\cell blue\cell [0,0,255]\cell\row\intbl
Iron\cell orange\cell [255,170,0]\cell\row\intbl
Magnesium\cell forest green\cell [34,139,34]\cell\row\intbl
Calcium \cell dark grey\cell [105,105,105]\cell\row\intbl
unknown\cell deep pink\cell [255,22,145]\cell\row\pard\par
\trowd
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote groupcolours}
${\footnote Group Colours}
K{\footnote group colours}
{\b Group Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b group}' {}
colour scheme colour codes residues by their position in a macromolecular {}
chain. Each chain is drawn as a smooth spectrum from blue through green, {}
yellow and orange to red. Hence the N terminus of proteins and 5' terminus {}
of nucleic acids are coloured red and the C terminus of proteins and 3' {}
terminus of nucleic acids are drawn in blue. If a chain has a large number {}
of heterogeneous molecules associated with it, the macromolecule may not be {}
drawn in the full 'range' of the spectrum. {}
'{\f2\b Group}' {}
can be selected from the RasMol {}
'{\f2\b Colours}' {}
menu. {}
\par\par
If a chain has a large number of heterogeneous molecules associated with it, {}
the macromolecule may not be drawn in the full range of the spectrum. When {}
RasMol performs group colouring it decides the range of colours it uses from {}
the residue numbering given in the PDB file. Hence the lowest residue {}
number is displayed in blue and the highest residue number is displayed as {}
red. Unfortunately, if a PDB file contains a large number of heteroatoms, {}
such as water molecules, that occupy the high residue numbers, the protein {}
is displayed in the blue-green end of the spectrum and the waters in the {}
yellow-red end of the spectrum. This is aggravated by there typically being {}
many more water molecules than amino acid residues. The solution to this {}
problem is to use the command {}
'{\uldb set hetero off}{\v sethetero}' {}
before applying the group {}
colour scheme. This can also be achieved by toggling {}
'{\f2\b Hetero Atoms}' {}
on the {}
'{\f2\b Options}' {}
menu before selecting {}
'{\f2\b Group}' {}
on the {}
'{\f2\b Colour}' {}
menu. This command {}
instructs RasMol to only use non-hetero residues in the group colour scaling. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote nmrmodelcolours}
${\footnote NMR Model Colours}
K{\footnote nmr model colours}
{\b NMR Model Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b model}' {}
colour scheme codes each NMR model with a distinct {}
colour.  The NMR model number is taken as a numeric value.  High values {}
are coloured in blue and lower values coloured in red. Rather than use a {}
fixed scale this scheme determines the maximum value of the {}
NMR model number and interpolates from red to blue appropriately. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote shapelycolours}
${\footnote Shapely Colours}
K{\footnote shapely colours}
{\b Shapely Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b shapely}' {}
colour scheme colour codes residues by amino acid property. This scheme {}
is based upon Bob Fletterick's "Shapely Models". Each amino acid and {}
nucleic acid residue is given a unique colour. The {}
'{\f2\b shapely}' {}
colour scheme is used by David Bacon's Raster3D program. This colour {}
scheme is similar to the {}
'{\uldb amino}{\v aminocolours}' {}
colour scheme. {}
\par\par
\cellx2000\cellx3700\cellx5500
\intbl
ALA\cell Medium Green\cell [140,255,140]\cell\row\intbl
GLY\cell White\cell [255,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
LEU\cell Olive Green\cell [ 69, 94, 69]\cell\row\intbl
SER\cell Medium Orange\cell [255,112, 66]\cell\row\intbl
VAL\cell Light Purple\cell [255,140,255]\cell\row\intbl
THR\cell Dark Orange\cell [184, 76,  0]\cell\row\intbl
LYS\cell Royal Blue\cell [ 71, 71,184]\cell\row\intbl
ASP\cell Dark Rose\cell [160,  0, 66]\cell\row\intbl
ILE\cell Dark Green\cell [ 0,  76,  0]\cell\row\intbl
ASN\cell Light Salmon\cell [255,124,112]\cell\row\intbl
GLU\cell Dark Brown\cell [102,  0,  0]\cell\row\intbl
PRO\cell Dark Grey\cell [ 82, 82, 82]\cell\row\intbl
ARG\cell Dark Blue\cell [  0,  0,124]\cell\row\intbl
PHE\cell Olive Grey\cell [ 83, 76, 66]\cell\row\intbl
GLN\cell Dark Salmon\cell [255, 76, 76]\cell\row\intbl
TYR\cell Medium Brown\cell [140,112, 76]\cell\row\intbl
HIS\cell Medium Blue\cell [112,112,255]\cell\row\intbl
CYS\cell Medium Yellow\cell [255,255,112]\cell\row\intbl
MET\cell Light Brown\cell [184,160, 66]\cell\row\intbl
TRP\cell Olive Brown\cell [ 79, 70,  0]\cell\row\intbl
ASX,GLX,PCA,HYP\cell Medium Purple\cell [255,  0,255]\cell\row\intbl
A\cell Light Blue\cell [160,160,255]\cell\row\intbl
C\cell Light Orange\cell [255,140, 75] \cell\row\intbl
G\cell Medium Salmon\cell [255,112,112]\cell\row\intbl
T\cell Light Green\cell [160,255,160]\cell\row\intbl
Backbone\cell Light Grey\cell [184,184,184]\cell\row\intbl
Special\cell Dark Purple\cell [ 94, 0, 94]\cell\row\intbl
Default\cell Medium Purple\cell [255,  0,255]\cell\row\pard\par
\trowd
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote structurecolours}
${\footnote Structure Colours}
K{\footnote structure colours}
{\b Structure Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b structure}' {}
colour scheme colours the molecule by protein secondary structure. {}
Alpha helices are coloured magenta, [240,0,128], beta sheets are {}
coloured yellow, [255,255,0], turns are coloured pale blue, [96,128,255] {}
and all other residues are coloured white. The secondary structure {}
is either read from the PDB file (HELIX, SHEET and TURN records), if available, {}
or determined using Kabsch and Sander's DSSP algorithm. The RasMol {}
'{\uldb structure}{\v structure}' {}
command may be used to force DSSP's structure assignment to be used. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote temperaturecolours}
${\footnote Temperature Colours}
K{\footnote temperature colours}
{\b Temperature Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b temperature}' {}
colour scheme colour codes each atom according to the anisotropic {}
temperature (beta) value stored in the PDB file. Typically this gives {}
a measure of the mobility/uncertainty of a given atom's position. High {}
values are coloured in warmer (red) colours and lower values in colder {}
(blue) colours. This feature is often used to associate a "scale" value {}
[such as amino acid variability in viral mutants] with each atom in a {}
PDB file, and colour the molecule appropriately. {}
\par\par
The difference between the {}
'{\f2\b temperature}' {}
and {}
'{\uldb charge}{\v chargecolours}' {}
colour schemes is that increasing temperature values proceed from blue {}
to red, whereas increasing charge values go from red to blue. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote usercolours}
${\footnote User Colours}
K{\footnote user colours}
{\b User Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b user}' {}
colour scheme allows RasMol to use the colour scheme stored in the {}
PDB file. The colours for each atom are stored in COLO records placed {}
in the PDB data file. This convention was introduced by David Bacon's {}
Raster3D program. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote hbondtypecolours}
${\footnote HBond Type Colours}
K{\footnote hbond type colours}
{\b HBond Type Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b type}' {}
colour scheme applies only to hydrogen bonds, hence is used in the command {}
'{\f2\b colour hbonds type}'. {}
This scheme colour codes each hydrogen bond according to the {}
distance along a protein chain between hydrogen bond donor and acceptor. {}
This schematic representation was introduced by Belhadj-Mostefa and {}
Milner-White. This representation gives a good insight into protein {}
secondary structure (hbonds forming alpha helices appear red, those {}
forming sheets appear yellow and those forming turns appear magenta). {}
\par\par
{\cellx2000\cellx3000\cellx4700
\intbl
Offset\cell Colour\cell Triple\cell\row\intbl
  +2\cell white  \cell [255,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
  +3\cell magenta\cell [255,0,255]\cell\row\intbl
  +4\cell red    \cell [255,0,0]\cell\row\intbl
  +5\cell orange \cell [255,165,0]\cell\row\intbl
  -3\cell cyan   \cell [0,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
  -4\cell green  \cell [0,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
default\cell yellow\cell [255,255,0]\cell\row
\pard\par\trowd}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote potentialcolours}
${\footnote Potential Colours}
K{\footnote potential colours}
{\b Potential Colours}\par\par
The RasMol {}
'{\f2\b potential}' {}
colour scheme applies only to dot surfaces, hence is used in the command {}
'{\f2\b colour dots potential}'. {}
This scheme colours each currently displayed dot by the electrostatic {}
potential at that point in space. This potential is calculated using {}
Coulomb's law taking the temperature/charge field of the input file to {}
be the charge assocated with that atom. This is the same interpretation {}
used by the {}
'{\uldb colour charge}{\v chargecolours}' {}
command. Like the {}
'{\uldb charge}{\v chargecolours}' {}
colour scheme low values are blue/white and high values are red. {}
The table below shows the static assignment of colours using a {}
dielectric constant value of 10. {}
\par\par
\cellx2000\cellx3000\cellx5500
\intbl
{ 25 < V      }\cell red   \cell [255,0,0]\cell\row\intbl
{ 10 < V <  25}\cell orange\cell [255,165,0]\cell\row\intbl
{  3 < V <  10}\cell yellow\cell [255,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
{  0 < V <   3}\cell green \cell [0,255,0]\cell\row\intbl
{ -3 < V <   0}\cell cyan  \cell [0,255,255]\cell\row\intbl
{-10 < V <  -3}\cell blue  \cell [0.0.255]\cell\row\intbl
{-25 < V < -10}\cell purple\cell [160,32,240]\cell\row\intbl
{        V < -25}\cell white \cell [255,255,255]\cell\row
\pard\par\trowd
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote codes}
#{\footnote aminoacidcodes}
${\footnote Amino Acid Codes}
K{\footnote amino acid codes}
{\b Amino Acid Codes}\par\par
The following table lists the names, single letter and three letter {}
codes of each of the amino acids. {}
\par\par
{\cellx1650\cellx2050\cellx2650\cellx4300\cellx4700\cellx5400
\intbl
Alanine\cell A\cell ALA\cell Arginine\cell R\cell ARG\cell\row\intbl
Asparagine\cell N\cell ASN\cell Aspartic acid\cell D\cell ASP\cell\row\intbl
Cysteine\cell C\cell CYS\cell Glutamic acid\cell E\cell GLU\cell\row\intbl
Glutamine\cell Q\cell GLN\cell Glycine\cell G\cell GLY\cell\row\intbl
Histidine\cell H\cell HIS\cell Isoleucine\cell I\cell ILE\cell\row\intbl
Leucine\cell L\cell LEU\cell Lysine\cell K\cell LYS\cell\row\intbl
Methionine\cell M\cell MET\cell Phenylalanine\cell F\cell PHE\cell\row\intbl
Proline\cell P\cell PRO\cell Serine\cell S\cell SER\cell\row\intbl
Threonine\cell T\cell THR\cell Tryptophan\cell W\cell TRP\cell\row\intbl
Tyrosine\cell Y\cell TYR\cell Valine\cell V\cell VAL\cell\row
\pard\par\trowd}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote booleanexpression}
#{\footnote booleans}
${\footnote Booleans}
K{\footnote booleans}
{\b Booleans}\par\par
A boolean parameter is a truth value. Valid boolean values are 'true' and {}
'false', and their synonyms 'on' and 'off'. Boolean parameters are commonly {}
used by RasMol to either enable or disable a representation or option. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chfile}
${\footnote File}
{\fs24\b File Formats}\par\par
\par\par
{\f2\b Protein Data Bank Files} {}
\par\par
If you do not have the PDB documentation, you may find the {}
following summary of the PDB file format useful. The Protein Data Bank {}
is a computer-based archival database for macromolecular structures. {}
The database was established in 1971 by Brookhaven National {}
Laboratory, Upton, New York, as a public domain repository for resolved {}
crystallographic structures. The Bank uses a uniform format to store {}
atomic coordinates and partial bond connectivities as derived from {}
crystallographic studies.  In 1999 the Protein Data Bank moved {}
to the Research Collaboratory for Structural Biology. {}
\par\par
PDB file entries consist of records of 80 characters each. Using the {}
punched card analogy, columns 1 to 6 contain a record-type identifier, {}
the columns 7 to 70 contain data. In older entries, columns 71 to 80 {}
are normally blank, {}
but may contain sequence information added by library management {}
programs.  In new entries conforming to the 1996 PDB format, there {}
is other information in those columns. The first four characters of {}
the record identifier are {}
sufficient to identify the type of record uniquely, and the syntax of {}
each record is independent of the order of records within any entry for {}
a particular macromolecule. {}
\par\par
The only record types that are of major interest to the RasMol program {}
are the ATOM and HETATM records which describe the position of each {}
atom. ATOM/HETATM records contain standard atom names and residue {}
abbreviations, along with sequence identifiers, coordinates in {}
Angstrom units, occupancies and thermal motion factors. The exact {}
details are given below as a FORTRAN format statement.  The "fmt" {}
column indicates use of the field in all PDB formats, {}
in the 1992 and earlier formats or in the 1996 and later formats. {}
\par\par
FORMAT(6A1,I5,1X,A4,A1,A3,1X,A1,I4,A1,3X,3F8.3,2F6.2,1X,I3,2X,A4,2A2)
\par\par
{\cellx1250\cellx6000\cellx6500
\intbl
Column \cell Content \cell fmt\cell\row\intbl
1-6 \cell 'ATOM' or 'HETATM' \cell all\cell\row\intbl
7-11 \cell Atom serial number (may have gaps) \cell all\cell\row\intbl
13-16 \cell Atom name, in IUPAC standard format \cell all\cell\row\intbl
17 \cell Alternate location indicator indicated by A, B or C \cell all\cell\row\intbl
18-20 \cell Residue name, in IUPAC standard format \cell all\cell\row\intbl
23-26 \cell Residue sequence number \cell all\cell\row\intbl
27 \cell Code for insertions of residues (i.e. 66A & 66B) \cell all\cell\row\intbl
31-38 \cell X coordinate \cell all\cell\row\intbl
39-46 \cell Y coordinate \cell all\cell\row\intbl
47-54 \cell Z coordinate \cell all\cell\row\intbl
55-60 \cell Occupancy \cell all\cell\row\intbl
61-66 \cell Temperature factor \cell all\cell\row\intbl
68-70 \cell Footnote number \cell 92\cell\row\intbl
73-76 \cell Segment Identifier (left-justified) \cell 96\cell\row\intbl
77-78 \cell Element Symbol (right-justified) \cell 96\cell\row\intbl
79-80 \cell Charge on the Atom \cell 96\cell\row}
\pard\par\trowd
\par\par
Residues occur in order starting from the N-terminal residue {}
for proteins and {}
5'-terminus for nucleic acids. If the residue sequence is known, {}
certain atom serial numbers may be omitted to allow for future insertion {}
of any missing atoms. Within each residue, atoms are ordered in a {}
standard manner, starting with the backbone (N-C-C-O for proteins) and {}
proceeding in increasing remoteness from the alpha carbon, along the {}
side chain. {}
\par\par
HETATM records are used to define post-translational modifications and {}
cofactors associated with the main molecule. TER records are {}
interpreted as breaks in the main molecule's backbone. {}
\par\par
If present, RasMol also inspects HEADER, COMPND, HELIX, SHEET, TURN, {}
CONECT, CRYST1, SCALE, MODEL, ENDMDL, EXPDTA and END records. Information such as the {}
name, database code, revision date and classification of the molecule {}
are extracted from HEADER and COMPND records, initial secondary {}
structure assignments are taken from HELIX, SHEET and TURN records, and {}
the end of the file may be indicated by an END record. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote rasmolinterpretationofpdbfields}
${\footnote RasMol Interpretation of PDB fields}
K{\footnote rasmol interpretation of pdb fields}
{\b RasMol Interpretation of PDB fields}\par\par
Atoms located at 9999.000, 9999.000, 9999.000 are assumed to be Insight {}
pseudo atoms and are ignored by RasMol. Atom names beginning ' Q' are {}
also assumed to be pseudo atoms or position markers. {}
\par\par
When a data file contains an NMR structure, multiple conformations may {}
be placed in a single PDB file delimited by pairs of MODEL and ENDMDL {}
records. RasMol displays all the NMR models contained in the file. {}
\par\par
Residue names "CSH", "CYH" and "CSM" are considered pseudonyms for {}
cysteine "CYS". Residue names "WAT", "H20", "SOL" and "TIP" are {}
considered pseudonyms for water "HOH". The residue name "D20" is {}
consider heavy water "DOD". The residue name "SUL" is considered a {}
sulphate ion "SO4". The residue name "CPR" is considered to be {}
cis-proline and is translated as "PRO". The residue name "TRY" is {}
considered a pseudonym for tryptophan "TRP". {}
\par\par
RasMol uses the HETATM fields to define the sets hetero, water, solvent {}
and ligand. Any group with the name "HOH", "DOD", "SO4" or "PO4" (or {}
aliased to one of these names by the preceding rules) is considered a {}
solvent and is considered to be defined by a HETATM field. {}
\par\par
RasMol only respects CONECT connectivity records in PDB files containing {}
fewer than 256 atoms. This is explained in more detail in the section on {}
determining molecule connectivity. CONECT records that define a bond {}
more than once are interpreted as specifying the bond order of that {}
bond, i.e. a bond specified twice is a double bond and a bond specified {}
three (or more) times is a triple bond.  This is not a standard PDB feature. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote pdbcolourschemespecification}
${\footnote PDB Colour Scheme Specification}
K{\footnote pdb colour scheme specification}
{\b PDB Colour Scheme Specification}\par\par
RasMol also accepts the supplementary COLO record type in the PDB {}
files. This record format was introduced by David Bacon's Raster3D {}
program for specifying the colour scheme to be used when rendering the {}
molecule. This extension is not currently supported by the PDB. The {}
COLO record has the same basic record type as the ATOM and HETATM {}
records described above. {}
\par\par
Colours are assigned to atoms using a matching process. The Mask field {}
is used in the matching process as follows. First RasMol reads in and {}
remembers all the ATOM, HETATM and COLO records in input order. When the {}
user-defined ('User') colour scheme is selected, RasMol goes through {}
each remembered ATOM/HETATM record in turn, and searches for a COLO {}
record that matches in all of columns 7 through 30. The first such COLO {}
record to be found determines the colour and radius of the atom. {}
\par\par
\pard\par
{\cellx1250\cellx4500
\intbl
Column \cell Content \cell\row\intbl
1-6 \cell 'COLOR' or 'COLOUR' \cell\row\intbl
7-30 \cell Mask (described below) \cell\row\intbl
31-38 \cell Red component \cell\row\intbl
39-46 \cell Green component \cell\row\intbl
47-54 \cell Blue component \cell\row\intbl
55-60 \cell Sphere radius in Angstroms \cell\row\intbl
61-70 \cell Comments \cell\row}
\pard\par\trowd
\par\par
Note that the Red, Green and Blue components are in the same positions {}
as the X, Y, and Z components of an ATOM or HETA record, and the van {}
der Waals radius goes in the place of the Occupancy. The Red, Green and {}
Blue components must all be in the range 0 to 1. {}
\par\par
In order that one COLO record can provide colour and radius {}
specifications for more than one atom (e.g. based on residue, atom {}
type, or any other criterion for which labels can be given somewhere in {}
columns 7 through 30), a 'don't-care' character, the hash mark "#" {}
(number or sharp sign) is used. This character, when found in a COLO {}
record, matches any character in the corresponding column in a {}
ATOM/HETATM record. All other characters must match identically to count {}
as a match. As an extension to the specification, any atom that fails {}
to match a COLO record is displayed in white. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote multiplenmrmodels}
${\footnote Multiple NMR Models}
K{\footnote multiple nmr models}
{\b Multiple NMR Models}\par\par
RasMol loads all of the NMR models from a PDB file no matter which {}
command is used: {}
'{\uldb load pdb <filename>}{\v load}' {}
or {}
'{\uldb load nmrpdb <filename>}{\v load}' {}
\par\par
Once multiple NMR conformations have been loaded they may be {}
manipulated with the atom expression extensions described in {}
'{\uldb Primitive Expressions}{\v primitiveexpressions}'. {}
In particular, the command {}
'{\uldb restrict */1}{\v restrict}' {}
will restrict the display to the first model only. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote cifandmmcifformatfiles}
${\footnote CIF and mmCIF Format Files}
K{\footnote cif and mmcif format files}
{\b CIF and mmCIF Format Files}\par\par
CIF is the IUCr standard for presentation of small molecules and mmCIF {}
is intended as the replacement for the fixed-field PDB format for {}
presentation of macromolecular structures. RasMol can accept data sets {}
in either format. {}
\par\par
There are many useful sites on the World Wide Web where information {}
tools and software related to CIF, mmCIF and the PDB can be found. The {}
following are good starting points for exploration: {}
\par\par
The International Union of Crystallography (IUCr) provides access to {}
software, dictionaries, policy statements and documentation relating to {}
CIF and mmCIF at: IUCr, Chester, England (www.iucr.org/iucr-top/cif/) {}
with many mirror sites. {}
\par\par
The Nucleic Acid Database Project provides access to its entries, {}
software and documentation, with an mmCIF page giving access to the {}
dictionary and mmCIF software tools at Rutgers University, New Jersey, {}
USA (http://ndbserver.rutgers.edu/NDB/mmcif) with many mirror sites. {}
\par\par
This version of RasMol restricts CIF or mmCIF tag values to essentially {}
the same conventions as are used for the fixed-field PDB format. Thus {}
chain identifiers and alternate conformation identifiers are limited to {}
a single character, atom names are limited to 4 characters, etc. RasMol {}
interprets the following CIF and mmCIF tags: {}
\pard \qj
{\f2 \par }\trowd \trgaph80\trleft-80
\cellx3232\cellx6544\cellx8848\pard \qj\intbl
{\b\f2 mmCIF tag}{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\b\f2 CIF tag\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\b\f2 Used for\cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\trowd
\trgaph80\trleft-80 \cellx3232\cellx6544\cellx8848\pard
\qj\intbl {\f2 _struct_biol.details\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 Info.classification\cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2
_database_2.database_code\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 Info.identcode\cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _entry.id\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row
}\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _struct_biol.id\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _struct.title\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 Info.moleculename\cell }\pard
\intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _chemical_name_common\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _chemical_name_systematic\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _chemical_name_mineral\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _symmetry.\par
  space_group_name_H-M\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _symmetry\par
  _space_group_name_H-M\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 Info.spacegroup\cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _cell.length_a\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell_length_a\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 Info.cell\cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard
\qj\intbl {\f2 _cell.length_b\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell_length_b\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell.length_c\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell_length_c\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard
\intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _cell.angle_alpha\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell_angle_alpha\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _cell.angle_beta\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell_angle_beta\cell
}\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell.angle_gamma\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _cell_angle_beta\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2
\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _atom_sites.\par
  fract_transf_matrix[1][1]\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _atom_sites\par
  _fract_tran_matrix_11\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 Used to compute\par
orthogonal coords\cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _atom_sites.\par
  fract_transf_vector[1]\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _atom_sites\par
  _fract_tran_vector_1\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _atom_sites.\par
  cartn_transf_matrix[1][1]\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _atom_sites\par
  _cartn_tran_matrix_11\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 Alternative to\par
compute orth. coords\cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _atom_sites.\par
  cartn_transf_vector[1]\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _atom_sites\par
  _cartn_tran_vector_1\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2
\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _atom_site.cartn_x\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _atom_site_cartn_x\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 atomic coordinates\cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...
\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 or\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _atom_site.fract_x\cell
}\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _atom_site_fract_x\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard
\qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _struct_conn.id\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 bonds\cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard
\qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 _geom_bond.atom_site_id_1\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _geom_bond_atom_site_label_1\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl
{\f2 \row }\pard
\qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2
_struct_conf.id\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 helices, sheets, turns\cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 _struct_sheet_range.id\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2
\row }\trowd \trgaph80\trleft-80
\cellx3232\cellx6544\cellx8848\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 ...\cell }\pard \qj\intbl {\f2 \cell }\pard \qj\intbl
{\f2 \cell }\pard \intbl {\f2 \row }\pard \qj {\f2 \par
\par }
A search is made through multiple data blocks for the desired tags, so {}
a single dataset may be composed from multiple data blocks, but {}
multiple data sets may not be stacked in the same file. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chmacspec}
${\footnote Machine-Specific Support}
{\fs24\b Machine-Specific Support}\par\par
\par\par
In the following sections, support for {}
'{\uldb Monochrome X-Windows}{\v monochromexwindowssupport}', {}
'{\uldb Tcl/Tk IPC}{\v tcltkipcsupport}', {}
'{\uldb UNIX sockets based IPC}{\v unixsocketsbasedipc}', {}
'{\uldb Compiling RasWin with Borland and MetroWerks}{\v compilingraswinwithborlandandmetrowerks}' {}
are described. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote monochromexwindowssupport}
${\footnote Monochrome X-Windows Support}
K{\footnote monochrome x-windows support}
{\b Monochrome X-Windows Support}\par\par
RasMol supports the many {}
monochrome UNIX workstations typically found in academia, such as low-end {}
SUN workstations and NCD X-terminals. The X11 version of RasMol (when {}
compiled in 8 bit mode) now detects black and white X-Windows displays and {}
enables dithering automatically. The use of run-time error diffusion dithering {}
means that all display modes of RasMol are available when in monochrome {}
mode. For best results, users should experiment with the set ambient {}
command to ensure the maximum contrast in resulting images. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote tcltkipcsupport}
${\footnote Tcl/Tk IPC support}
K{\footnote tcl/tk ipc support}
{\b Tcl/Tk IPC support}\par\par
Version 4 of Tk {}
graphics library changed the protocol used to communicate between Tk {}
applications. RasMol version 2.6 was modified such that it could {}
communicate with both this new protocol and the previous version 3 protocol {}
supported by RasMol v2.5. Although Tcl/Tk 3.x applications may only {}
communicate with other 3.x applications and Tcl/Tk 4.x applications with other {}
4.x applications, these changes allow RasMol to communicate between {}
processes with both protocols (potentially concurrently). {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote unixsocketsbasedipc}
${\footnote UNIX sockets based IPC}
K{\footnote unix sockets based ipc}
{\b UNIX sockets based IPC}\par\par
The UNIX implementation of RasMol {}
supports BSD-style socket communication. An identical socket mechanism is {}
also being developed for VMS, Apple Macintosh and Microsoft Windows {}
systems. This should allow RasMol to interactively display results of a {}
computation on a remote host. The current protocol acts as a TCP/IP server on {}
port 21069 that executes command lines until either the command {}
'{\f2\b exit}' {}
or the {}
command {}
'{\f2\b quit}' {}
is typed. The command {}
exit {}
from the RasMol server, the command {}
'{\f2\b quit}' {}
both disconnects the current {}
session and terminates RasMol. This functionality may be tested using the {}
UNIX command {}
'{\f2\b telnet <hostname> 21069}'. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote compilingraswinwithborlandandmetrowerks}
${\footnote Compiling RasWin with Borland and MetroWerks}
K{\footnote compiling raswin with borland and metrowerks}
{\b Compiling RasWin with Borland and MetroWerks}\par\par
A number of changes were made to the {}
source code in the transition from version 2.5 to 2.6 to allow {}
the Microsoft Windows version of RasMol to compile {}
using the Borland C/C++ compiler. These fixes include name changes for the {}
standard library and special code to avoid a bug in _fmemset. {}
Additional changes were made in the transition from 2.6 to 2.7 to {}
allow compilation with the MetroWerks compilers. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
#{\footnote chbib}
${\footnote Bibliography}
{\fs24\b Bibliography}\par\par
\par\par
{\f2\b Molecular Graphics} {}
\par\par
[1] Nelson Max, "Computer Representation of Molecular Surfaces", IEEE {}
Computer Graphics and Applications, pp.21-29, August 1983. {}
\par\par
[2] Arthur M. Lesk, "Protein Architecture: A Practical Approach", IRL {}
Press Publishers, 1991. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Molecular Graphics Programs} {}
\par\par
[3] Per J. Kraulis, "MOLSCRIPT: A Program to Produce both Detailed and {}
Schematic Plots of Protein Structures", Journal of Applied {}
Crystallography, Vol.24, pp.946-950, 1991. {}
\par\par
[4] David Bacon and Wayne F. Anderson, "A Fast Algorithm for Rendering {}
Space-Filling Molecule Pictures", Journal of Molecular Graphics, Vol.6, {}
No.4, pp.219-220, December 1988. {}
\par\par
[5] David C. Richardson and Jane S. Richardson, "The Kinemage: A tool {}
for Scientific Communication", Protein Science, Vol.1, No.1,pp.3-9, {}
January 1992. {}
\par\par
[6] Mike Carson, "RIBBONS 2.0", Journal of Applied Crystallography, {}
Vol.24, pp.958-961, 1991. {}
\par\par
[7] Conrad C. Huang, Eric F. Pettersen, Teri E. Klein, Thomas E. {}
Ferrin and Robert Langridge, "Conic: A Fast Renderer for {}
Space-Filling Molecules with Shadows", Journal of Molecular Graphics, {}
Vol.9, No.4, pp.230-236, December 1991. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Molecular Biology Algorithms} {}
\par\par
[8] Wolfgang Kabsch and Christian Sander, "Dictionary of Protein {}
Secondary Structure: Pattern Recognition of Hydrogen-Bonded and {}
Geometrical Features", Biopolymers, Vol.22, pp.2577-2637, 1983. {}
\par\par
[9] Michael L. Connolly, "Solvent-Accessible Surfaces of Proteins and Nucleic {}
Acids", Science, Vol.221, No.4612, pp.709-713, August 1983. {}
\par\par
[10] Khaled Belhadj-Mostefa, Ron Poet and E. James Milner-White, {}
"Displaying Inter-Main Chain Hydrogen Bond Patterns in Proteins", {}
Journal of Molecular Graphics, Vol.9, No.3, pp.194-197, September 1991. {}
\par\par
[11] Mike Carson, "Ribbon Models of Macromolecules", Journal of {}
Molecular Graphics, Vol.5, No.2, pp.103-106, June 1987. {}
\par\par
[12] Mike Carson and Charles E. Bugg, "Algorithm for Ribbon Models of {}
Proteins", Journal of Molecular Graphics, Vol.4, No.2, pp.121-122, June {}
1986. {}
\par\par
[13] H. Iijima, J. B. Dunbar Jr. and G. Marshall, "Calibration of {}
Effective van der Waals Atomic Contact Radii for Proteins and {}
Peptides", Proteins: Structure, Functions and Genetics, Vol.2, {}
pp.330-339,1987. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b Graphics Algorithms} {}
\par\par
[14] J. Foley, A. van Dam, S. Feiner and J. Hughes, "Computer Graphics: {}
Principles and Practice", 2nd Edition, Addison Wesley Publishers, 1990. {}
\par\par
[15] J. Cleary and G. Wyvill, "Analysis of an Algorithm for Fast Ray {}
Tracing using Uniform Space Subdivision", The Visual Computer, Vol.4, {}
pp.65-83, 1988. {}
\par\par
[16] Thomas Porter,"Spherical Shading", Computer Graphics Vol.12, ACM {}
SIGGRAPH, pp.282-285, 1978. {}
\par\par
[17] Jean-Michel Cense, "Exact Visibility Calculation for Space-Filling {}
Molecular Models", Journal of Molecular Graphics, Vol.9, No.3, {}
pp.191-193, September 1991. {}
\par\par
[18] Chris Schafmeister, "Fast Algorithm for Generating CPK Images on {}
Graphics Workstations", Journal of Molecular Graphics, Vol.8, No.4, {}
pp.201-206, December 1990. {}
\par\par
[19] Bruce A. Johnson, "MSURF: A Rapid and General Program for the {}
Representation of Molecular Surfaces", Journal of Molecular Graphics, {}
Vol.5, No.3, pp.167-169, September 1987. {}
\par\par
{\f2\b File Formats} {}
\par\par
[20] Frances C. Bernstein et al., "The Protein Data Bank: A {}
Computer-Based Archival File for Macromolecular Structures", Journal of {}
Molecular Biology, Vol.112, pp.535-542, 1977. {}
\par\par
[21] Arthur Dalby, James G. Nourse, W. Douglas Hounshell, Ann K. I. {}
Gushurst, David L. Grier, Burton A. Leland and John Laufer, "Description {}
of Several Chemical File Formats Used by Computer Programs Developed at {}
Molecular Design Limited", Journal of Chemical Information and Computer {}
Sciences, Vol.32, No.3, pp.244-255, 1992. {}
\par\par
[22] Adobe Systems Inc., "PostScript Language Reference Manual", {}
Addison-Wesley Publishers, Reading, Mass., 1985. {}
\par\par
[23] Philip E. Bourne et al., "The Macromolecular Crystallographic {}
Information File (mmCIF)", Meth. Enzymol. (1997) 277, 571-590. {}
\par\par
[24] Sydney R. Hall, "The STAR File: a New Format for Electronic Data {}
Transfer and Archiving", Journal of Chemical Information and Computer {}
Sciences, Vol. 31, 326-333, 1991. {}
\par\page\par
+{\footnote doc}
}
